# 2. Administration

## Functions and Governance

2.1. \[Blank\]

2.1A. Australian Energy Market Operator

2.1A.1. AEMO is conferred functions in respect of the Wholesale
Electricity Market under the WEM Regulations and AEMO Regulations.

2.1A.1A. The function of ensuring that the SWIS operates in a secure and
reliable manner for the purposes of the WEM Regulations is conferred on
AEMO.

2.1A.2. The WEM Regulations also provide for the WEM Rules to confer
additional functions on AEMO. The functions conferred on AEMO are:

\(a\) to operate the Reserve Capacity Mechanism, the Short Term Energy
Market and the Real-Time Market;

\(b\) to settle such transactions as it is required to under these WEM
Rules;

\(c\) to carry out a Long Term PASA study and to publish the Statement
of Opportunities Report;

\(d\) to do anything that AEMO determines to be conducive or incidental
to the performance of the functions set out in this clause 2.1A.2;

\(e\) to process applications for participation, and for the
registration, de-registration, transfer and Essential System Services
accreditation of facilities;

(eA) to procure, schedule and dispatch Essential System Services to meet
the Essential System Service Standards;

(eB) to monitor Rule Participants' compliance with the WEM Rules in
accordance with clause 2.13.7;

(eC) to trigger and administer the SESSM in accordance with section
3.15A;

(eD) to procure, schedule and dispatch Non-Co-optimised Essential System
Services in accordance with these WEM Rules;

\(f\) to release information required to be released by these WEM Rules;

\(g\) to publish information required to be published by these WEM
Rules;

\(h\) to develop WEM Procedures, and amendments and replacements for
them, where required by these WEM Rules;

\(i\) to make available copies of the WEM Procedures, as are in force at
the relevant time;

(iA) to monitor Rule Participants’ compliance with WEM Rules relating to
dispatch and Power System Security and Power System Reliability;

\(j\) to support:

i\. the Economic Regulation Authority's monitoring of other Rule
Participants’ compliance with the WEM Rules;

ii\. the Economic Regulation Authority's investigation of potential
breaches of the WEM Rules (including by reporting potential breaches to
the Economic Regulation Authority); and

iii\. any enforcement action taken by the Economic Regulation Authority
under the Regulations and these WEM Rules;

\(k\) to support the Economic Regulation Authority in its market
surveillance role, including providing any market related information
required by the Economic Regulation Authority;

\(l\) to support the Coordinator and the Economic Regulation Authority
in their roles of monitoring market effectiveness, including providing
any market related information required by the Coordinator or the
Economic Regulation Authority;

> (lA) to contribute to the development and improve the effectiveness of
> the operation and administration of the Wholesale Electricity Market,
> by:

i\. developing Rule Change Proposals;

ii\. providing support and assistance to other parties to develop Rule
Change Proposals;

iii\. providing information to the Coordinator as required to support
the Coordinator’s functions under these WEM Rules; and

iv\. providing information and assistance to the Coordinator and the
Economic Regulation Authority as required to support the reviews they
carry out under the WEM Rules;

(lB) to develop and maintain a Congestion Information Resource;

(lC) to establish, maintain and update a DER Register in accordance with
clause 3.24;

(lD) to participate in the Technical Rules Committee and provide advice
on Technical Rules Change Proposals as required by the Economic
Regulation Authority under the Access Code, to provide submissions as
part of the public consultation process in respect of Technical Rules
Change Proposals and to develop and submit Technical Rules Change
Proposals relating to System Operation Functions;

(IE) to support each Network Operator in relation to the standard or
technical level of performance in respect of a Technical Requirement
applicable to Transmission Connected Generating Systems and perform the
associated functions set out in Chapter 3A of these WEM Rules;

(lF) to advise and consult with each Network Operator in respect of
AEMO's System Operation Functions as contemplated under the Technical
Rules applicable to their Network;

(lG) to provide information and assistance to the Coordinator relating
to the preparation of the Whole of System Plan by the Coordinator;

(lH) to contribute to, provide information and assist with, the
development of the Transmission System Plan in accordance with section
4.5B;

(lI) to support the Coordinator's role, and to facilitate and implement
decisions by the Coordinator and the Minister regarding the evolution
and development of the Wholesale Electricity Market and the WEM Rules,
and the management of Power System Security and Power System Reliability
in the SWIS; and

\(m\) to carry out any other functions conferred, and perform any
obligations imposed, on it under these WEM Rules.

2.1A.3. AEMO may delegate any of its functions under the WEM Rules
(other than the power to do the things indicated as not able to be
delegated in the WEM Regulations) to a Delegate. A function performed by
a Delegate is to be taken to be performed by AEMO. A Delegate performing
a function under this clause 2.1A.3 is to be taken to do so in
accordance with the terms of the delegation unless the contrary is
shown. Nothing in this clause 2.1A.3 limits the ability of AEMO to
perform a function through an officer, employee or agent.

2.1A.4. Where AEMO appoints a Delegate, AEMO must publish on the WEM
Website information as to:

\(a\) the appointment of the Delegate;

\(b\) the identity of the Delegate; and

\(c\) the scope of the delegation, including, without limitation, the
activities in relation to which the delegation applies.

2.1A.5. Where AEMO appoints a Delegate:

\(a\) AEMO may notify a Market Participant of the scope of the
delegation and require that the communications from the Market
Participant to AEMO are made through the Delegate; and

\(b\) a Market Participant must ensure that any communications from the
Market Participant to AEMO under these WEM Rules within the scope of the
delegation are made through the Delegate to the extent notified to the
Market Participant by AEMO.

2.1A.6. A Delegate must carry out the relevant function, and other
rights and obligations, in respect of which it has been appointed by
AEMO, in accordance with the provisions of these WEM Rules, the WEM
Procedures, and the instrument of delegation.

2.1A.7. A Delegate is a "market governance participant" for the purposes
of section 126 of the Electricity Industry Act to the extent that it
performs a function conferred on it under clause 2.1A.3.

2.1A.8. Notwithstanding that AEMO may have appointed a Delegate, AEMO
remains liable under these WEM Rules for the performance of any function
conferred on the Delegate under clause 2.1A.3.

2.2. \[Blank\]

2.2A. The Economic Regulation Authority

2.2A.1. The following functions are conferred on the Economic Regulation
Authority under these WEM Rules:

\(a\) to monitor other Rule Participants’ compliance with these WEM
Rules, to investigate potential breaches of these WEM Rules, and if
thought appropriate, initiate enforcement action under the Regulations
and these WEM Rules;

\(b\) \[Blank\]

(bA) \[Blank\]

(bB) to contribute to the development and improve the effectiveness of
the operation and administration of the Wholesale Electricity Market and
these WEM Rules, by developing Rule Change Proposals;

(bC) to support the Coordinator's role, and to facilitate and implement
decisions by the Coordinator and the Minister regarding the evolution
and development of the Wholesale Electricity Market and the WEM Rules;

\(c\) to carry out any other functions conferred, and perform any
obligations imposed, on it under these WEM Rules; and

\(d\) to do anything that the Economic Regulation Authority determines
to be conducive or incidental to the performance of the functions set
out in this clause 2.2A.1.

2.2B. \[Blank\]

2.2C. Network Operators

2.2C.1. The WEM Regulations provide for the WEM Rules to confer
functions on registered participants of a specified class. The functions
conferred on each Network Operator are to:

\(a\) calculate and provide Loss Factors to AEMO;

\(b\) provide Limit Advice to AEMO;

(bA) provide information and assistance to the Coordinator relating to
the preparation of the Whole of System Plan by the Coordinator;

(bB) procure Non-Co-optimised Essential System Services in accordance
with sections 3.11A and 3.11B;

(bC) develop and publish a Transmission System Plan in accordance with
section 4.5B;

(bD) to facilitate and support the Coordinator's role under clause
2.2D.1(h), and to prepare for and enable the evolution and development
of the Wholesale Electricity Market and the WEM Rules;

\(c\) develop WEM Procedures, and amendments to and replacements for
them, as required by these WEM Rules;

(cA) perform the functions in relation to the standard or technical
level of performance in respect of a Technical Requirement applicable to
Transmission Connected Generating Systems electrically connected to the
Network that the Network Operator operates as set out in Chapter 3A and
Appendix 12 of these WEM Rules;

\(d\) do anything that the Network Operator determines to be conducive
or incidental to the performance of the functions set out in this clause
2.2C.1; and

\(e\) carry out any other functions conferred, and perform any other
obligations imposed, on Network Operators under these WEM Rules.

2.2D. Coordinator of Energy

2.2D.1. The WEM Regulations provide for the WEM Rules to confer
functions on the Coordinator. The functions conferred on the Coordinator
are to:

\(a\) carry out the tasks necessary to establish the dispute resolution
mechanism contained in section 1.42 including but not limited to the
appointment of arbitrators and establishment of any expert panels;

\(b\) provide any administrative services deemed necessary by the
Coordinator to facilitate the referral of disputes to an arbitrator in
accordance with section 1.42;

\(c\) develop WEM Procedures, and amendments to and replacements for
them, as required by these WEM Rules;

\(d\) do anything that the Coordinator determines to be conducive or
incidental to the performance of the functions set out in this clause
2.2D.1;

\(e\) develop and publish a Whole of System Plan in accordance with
section 4.5A;

\(f\) administer these WEM Rules;

\(g\) develop amendments to these WEM Rules and replacements for them;

\(h\) consider and, in consultation with the Market Advisory Committee,
progress the evolution and development of the Wholesale Electricity
Market and these WEM Rules;

\(i\) provide MAC Secretariat services to the Market Advisory Committee
and support its independent Chair;

(iA) trigger the procurement of Non-Co-optimised Essential System
Services in accordance with section 3.11A;

(iB) to perform any obligations imposed on the Coordinator under section
4.5B;

\(j\) undertake reviews and consultation as required under these WEM
Rules; and

\(k\) carry out any other functions conferred, and perform any other
obligations imposed, on the Coordinator under these WEM Rules.

2.3. The Market Advisory Committee

2.3.1. The Market Advisory Committee is a committee of industry
representatives convened by the Coordinator:

\(a\) to advise the Coordinator regarding Rule Change Proposals;

\(b\) to advise AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator
and Network Operators regarding Procedure Change Proposals;

\(c\) to advise the Coordinator, AEMO and the Economic Regulation
Authority on the development of Rule Change Proposals where requested by
the Coordinator, AEMO or the Economic Regulation Authority in accordance
with clauses 2.5.1A or 2.5.1B or 2.5.1C;

\(d\) to advise the Coordinator regarding matters concerning, and the
Coordinator’s plans for, the evolution and development of the Wholesale
Electricity Market and these WEM Rules; and

\(e\) to provide assistance to the Coordinator in its monitoring role
under clauses 2.16.13A and 2.16.13B.

2.3.1A. The Market Advisory Committee is a non-voting committee.

2.3.1B. The Market Advisory Committee must endeavour where practicable
to reach a consensus position on any issue before it.

2.3.1C. If, after allowing a reasonable time for discussion, the
independent Chair of the Market Advisory Committee determines that a
consensus position either will not be achieved, or is unlikely to be
achieved within a time which is reasonable in the circumstances, then
the independent Chair must provide advice to the Coordinator which
reflects any majority view and which includes or is accompanied by the
dissenting views.

2.3.2. The Coordinator must develop and publish a constitution for the
Market Advisory Committee detailing matters including:

\(a\) the process for convening the Market Advisory Committee;

\(b\) the terms of reference of the Market Advisory Committee;

\(c\) the membership terms of Market Advisory Committee members;

\(d\) the process for appointing and replacing Market Advisory Committee
members by the Coordinator;

\(e\) the conduct of Market Advisory Committee meetings;

\(f\) the role of the MAC Secretariat in respect of the Market Advisory
Committee;

\(g\) the interaction between the Market Advisory Committee and the
Coordinator, AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority and Network
Operators;

\(h\) the ability of the Market Advisory Committee to delegate any of
the roles described in clause 2.3.1 to a Working Group; and

\(i\) the governance arrangements to apply between the Market Advisory
Committee and any Working Groups where the Market Advisory Committee
delegates any of the roles described in clause 2.3.1 to a Working Group.

2.3.3. The constitution of the Market Advisory Committee must be
consistent with the WEM Rules.

2.3.4. The Coordinator must invite public submissions when developing or
amending the constitution of the Market Advisory Committee.

2.3.5. Subject to clause 2.3.13, the Market Advisory Committee must
comprise:

\(a\) at least six and not more than eight members representing Market
Participants, excluding Synergy;

\(b\) at least one member and not more than two representing Contestable
Customers;

\(c\) at least one and not more than two members representing Network
Operators, of whom one must represent Western Power;

\(d\) \[Blank\]

\(e\) at least two independent members nominated by the Minister to
represent small-use consumers;

\(f\) \[Blank\]

\(g\) two members representing AEMO;

\(h\) one member representing Synergy; and

\(i\) an independent Chair, to be appointed by the Minister under clause
2.3.8A.

2.3.5A. Subject to clause 2.3.13, when appointing or removing members of
the Market Advisory Committee of the class described in clause 2.3.5(a),
the Coordinator must use its reasonable endeavours to ensure equal
representation of Market Participants that:

\(a\) own, control or operate an Energy Producing System or Energy
Producing Systems in the South West Interconnected System; and

\(b\) sell electricity to customers in the South West Interconnected
System.

2.3.5B. The same organisation cannot be represented by more than one
member on the Market Advisory Committee simultaneously (other than the 2
members representing AEMO under clause 2.3.5(g)).

2.3.5C. Candidates for appointment under clause 2.3.5(c), (g) and (h)
must be proposed to the Coordinator by Western Power, AEMO and Synergy
respectively.

2.3.6. The Minister may appoint a representative to attend Market
Advisory Committee meetings as an observer.

2.3.7. The Economic Regulation Authority may appoint a representative to
attend Market Advisory Committee meetings as an observer.

2.3.7A. The Coordinator or the independent Chair of the Market Advisory
Committee may invite a person to attend Market Advisory Committee
meetings as an observer, either for a specified meeting or meetings or
until further notice.

2.3.8. The Coordinator may appoint and remove members of the Market
Advisory Committee in consultation with the independent Chair.

2.3.8A. The Minister must appoint an independent Chair of the Market
Advisory Committee, who in the opinion of the Minister:

\(a\) is free from any business or other relationship that could
materially interfere with the independent exercise of the independent
Chair’s judgment; and

\(b\) has the skills and experience necessary to carry out the
responsibilities and functions of the independent Chair of the Market
Advisory Committee.

2.3.8B. Each independent Chair of the Market Advisory Committee will be
appointed for a term of three years, with the possibility of one
three-year extension.

2.3.8C. The Minister may remove an independent Chair of the Market
Advisory Committee at any time in the following circumstances:

\(a\) the person becomes an undischarged bankrupt; or

\(b\) the person becomes of unsound mind or his or her estate is liable
to be dealt with in any way under law relating to mental health;

\(c\) an event specified in the independent Chair terms of engagement;
or

\(d\) in the Minister’s opinion the person no longer adequately meets
the criteria in clause 2.3.8A.

2.3.8D. The Minister may appoint an interim Chair of the Market Advisory
Committee in the event that the independent Chair becomes temporarily
unavailable or the position is otherwise vacant for any reason. The
interim Chair may be appointed for an initial term of up to six months
and may be reappointed for further six months. The interim Chair must
meet, so far as is practicable, the criteria in clause 2.3.8A.

2.3.8E. The Coordinator may appoint an interim member representing
small-use consumers if both positions under clause 2.3.5(e) are vacant
for any reason.

2.3.9. The Coordinator must annually review the composition of the
Market Advisory Committee in consultation with the independent Chair of
the Market Advisory Committee and may remove and appoint members
following the review.

2.3.10. When appointing and removing members of the Market Advisory
Committee, the Coordinator must consult with the independent Chair of
the Market Advisory Committee, and (except in the case of candidates for
appointment under clause 2.3.5(c), (g) and (h), to whom clause 2.3.5C
applies) take nominations from Rule Participants and industry groups,
that it considers relevant to the Wholesale Electricity Market, and, if
practicable, must choose members from persons nominated.

2.3.11. The Coordinator may remove a member of the Market Advisory
Committee at any time in the following circumstances:

\(a\) the person becomes an undischarged bankrupt;

\(b\) the person becomes of unsound mind or his or her estate is liable
to be dealt with in any way under law relating to mental health; or

\(c\) an event specified for this purpose in the constitution for the
Market Advisory Committee occurs; or

\(d\) in the Coordinator’s opinion the person no longer adequately
represents the person or class of persons that they were appointed to
represent in accordance with clause 2.3.5.

2.3.12. A member of the Market Advisory Committee may resign by giving
notice to the Coordinator in writing.

2.3.13. Where a position on the Market Advisory Committee is vacant at
any time, the Coordinator must use its reasonable endeavours to appoint
a person to fill the position, but the Market Advisory Committee may
continue to perform its functions under this clause 2.3 despite any
vacancy.

2.3.14. \[Blank\]

2.3.15. The independent Chair must convene the Market Advisory
Committee:

\(a\) on any occasion where these WEM Rules require a meeting to discuss
a Rule Change Proposal;

(aA) on any occasion where these WEM Rules require a meeting to discuss
a Procedure Change Proposal;

\(b\) \[Blank\];

\(c\) on any occasion when two or more members of the Market Advisory
Committee have informed the independent Chair in writing that they wish
to bring a matter regarding the evolution or the development of the
Wholesale Electricity Market or these WEM Rules before the Market
Advisory Committee for discussion; and

\(d\) on any occasion the Coordinator has informed the independent Chair
that she or he wishes to bring a matter regarding the evolution or the
development of the Wholesale Electricity Market or these WEM Rules
before the Market Advisory Committee for discussion.

2.3.16. Subject to her or his obligations of confidentiality under these
Rules and otherwise, the Coordinator must use reasonable endeavours to
provide the Market Advisory Committee any information in the
Coordinator’s possession obtained in the course of performing a function
under these WEM Rules that is pertinent to the issues being addressed by
the Market Advisory Committee.

2.3.17. The Market Advisory Committee may:

\(a\) establish one or more Working Groups comprising Representatives of
Rule Participants and other interested persons, to assist the Market
Advisory Committee in advising the Coordinator, Economic Regulation
Authority, AEMO and Network Operators on any of the matters listed in
clause 2.3.1 of these WEM Rules; and

\(b\) disband any Working Groups where it considers that the Working
Group is no longer required, or will no longer be required, to assist
the Market Advisory Committee in advising the Coordinator, Economic
Regulation Authority and AEMO on any of the matters listed in clause
2.3.1 of these WEM Rules.

Market Documents

2.4. WEM Rules made by the Coordinator

2.4.1. The Coordinator:

\(a\) is responsible for maintaining and publishing the WEM Rules;

\(b\) is responsible for ensuring the development of amendments of, and
replacements for, the WEM Rules; and

\(c\) may make amending rules (as defined in the Regulations)
(“**Amending Rules**”) in accordance with this Chapter.

2.4.2. The Coordinator must not make Amending Rules unless it is
satisfied that the WEM Rules, as proposed to be amended or replaced, are
consistent with the Wholesale Market Objectives.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>The proposed new Amending Rules – clauses 2.4.3(f), 2.4.3B, 2.4.3C,
2.4.3D and 2.4.3E – enable the Coordinator to seek technical or
engineering advice or information from Western Power and AEMO when a
Rule Change Proposal relates to amending a WEM Technical Standard. This
additional step ensures that when standards relating to Power System
Security and Reliability are proposed to be modified, proper engineering
advice is provided by the two primary entities responsible for system
security and reliability. The Coordinator retains the discretion to
request technical advice at any time throughout the Standard Rule Change
Process.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.4.3. In deciding whether to make Amending Rules, the Coordinator must
have regard to the following:

\(a\) any applicable statement of policy principles given to the
Coordinator under clause 2.5.2;

(aA) any advice provided by the Market Advisory Committee regarding the
evolution or the development of the Wholesale Electricity Market or
these WEM Rules;

\(b\) the practicality and cost of implementing the Rule Change
Proposal;

\(c\) the views expressed in any submissions on the Rule Change
Proposal;

\(d\) any advice by the Market Advisory Committee where the Market
Advisory Committee met to consider the Rule Change Proposal;

(dA) whether the advice from the Market Advisory Committee provided
under clause 2.4.3(d) reflects a consensus view or a majority view, and,
if the latter, any dissenting views included in or accompanying the
advice and how these views have been taken into account by the
Coordinator;

\(e\) any technical studies that the Coordinator considers are necessary
to assist in assessing the Rule Change Proposal; and

\(f\) any advice or information provided by AEMO or a Network Operator
under clause 2.4.3C.

2.4.3A. Without limiting clause 2.4.3, in deciding whether or not to
make Amending Rules, the Coordinator may seek information or advice, and
the Coordinator may have regard to that information or advice, from any
person that the Coordinator considers is appropriate to assist it in
assessing the relevant Rule Change Proposal.

2.4.3B. If the Coordinator considers that making Amending Rules will
directly or indirectly affect a WEM Technical Standard, the Coordinator
must request advice, which may include a request to provide information,
from AEMO and each Network Operator that the Coordinator considers will
be affected by the relevant Amending Rules to assist the Coordinator in
assessing the relevant Rule Change Proposal. The following applies to a
request:

\(a\) the Coordinator must consult with each recipient of the request,
on the requirements in the request and the timeframes for responding to
the request; and

\(b\) the Coordinator may, at her or his discretion, require each
recipient of the request to provide the advice jointly or independently.

2.4.3C. Subject to clause 2.4.3D, each recipient of a request under
clause 2.4.3B must provide the advice or information requested by the
Coordinator under clause 2.4.3B in accordance with the timeframes and
any other requirements specified in the request.

2.4.3D. If a recipient of a request under clause 2.4.3B requires a
longer timeframe to provide the advice or information requested by the
Coordinator under clause 2.4.3B, the recipient:

\(a\) may seek an extension to the timeframe from the Coordinator; and

\(b\) must outline the reasons for seeking the extension.

2.4.3E. The Coordinator may, in her or his sole discretion, approve or
decline a request for an extension of time made under clause 2.4.3D.

2.4.4. The Coordinator must maintain on the Coordinator's Website a Rule
Change Proposal form which must include:

\(a\) contact details for proposing rule changes; and

\(b\) information that must be provided in proposing a change,
including:

i\. the name of the person submitting the Rule Change Proposal, and
where relevant, details of the organisation that person represents;

ii\. the issue to be addressed;

iii\. the degree of urgency of the proposed change;

iv\. any proposed specific changes to particular rules;

v\. a description of how the rule change would allow the WEM Rules to
better address the Wholesale Market Objectives; and

vi\. any identifiable costs and benefits of the change.

2.4A. WEM Rules made by the Minister

2.4A.1. This section 2.4A applies from 21 September 2019 until 1 July
2021, being the date on which the Minister's power to make Amending
Rules under regulation 7(5) of the WEM Regulations ends.

2.4A.2. Despite anything in these WEM Rules, the Minister may develop
and make Amending Rules in accordance with regulation 7(5) of the WEM
Regulations.

2.5. Rule Change Proposals

2.5.1. Any person may make a Rule Change Proposal by completing a Rule
Change Proposal form and submitting it to the Coordinator.

2.5.1A. AEMO must, before commencing the development of a Rule Change
Proposal or providing material support or assistance to another party to
develop a Rule Change Proposal, consult with the Market Advisory
Committee on:

\(a\) the matters to be addressed by the Rule Change Proposal and if
applicable the nature and scope of the support or assistance requested
by the other party;

\(b\) what options exist to resolve the matters to be addressed by the
Rule Change Proposal;

\(c\) AEMO’s estimated costs of developing the Rule Change Proposal or
providing the support or assistance requested by the other party;

\(d\) whether and when AEMO should develop the Rule Change Proposal or
if AEMO should provide the support or assistance requested by the other
party; and

\(e\) whether and how the Market Advisory Committee will be consulted
during the development of the Rule Change Proposal,

and take into account any advice, comments or objections provided by any
member or observer of the Market Advisory Committee in deciding whether,
when and how to develop the Rule Change Proposal or provide material
support or assistance to another party to develop the Rule Change
Proposal.

2.5.1B. The Economic Regulation Authority must, before commencing the
development of a Rule Change Proposal or providing material support or
assistance to another party to develop a Rule Change Proposal, consult
with the Market Advisory Committee on:

\(a\) the matters to be addressed by the Rule Change Proposal and if
applicable the nature and scope of the support or assistance requested
by the other party;

\(b\) what options exist to resolve the matters to be addressed by the
Rule Change Proposal;

\(c\) the Economic Regulation Authority’s estimated costs of developing
the Rule Change Proposal or providing the support or assistance
requested by the other party;

\(d\) whether and when the Economic Regulation Authority should develop
the Rule Change Proposal or if the Economic Regulation Authority should
provide the support or assistance requested by the other party; and

\(e\) whether and how the Market Advisory Committee will be consulted
during the development of the Rule Change Proposal,

and take into account any advice, comments or objections provided by any
member or observer of the Market Advisory Committee in deciding whether,
when and how to develop the Rule Change Proposal or provide material
support or assistance to another party to develop the Rule Change
Proposal.

2.5.1C. The Coordinator must, before commencing the development of a
Rule Change Proposal or providing material support or assistance to
another party to develop a Rule Change Proposal, consult with the Market
Advisory Committee on:

\(a\) the matters to be addressed by the Rule Change Proposal and if
applicable the nature and scope of the support or assistance requested
by the other party;

\(b\) what options exist to resolve the matters to be addressed by the
Rule Change Proposal;

\(c\) the Coordinator’s estimated costs to be recovered through
Coordinator Fees of developing the Rule Change Proposal or providing the
support or assistance requested by the other party;

\(d\) whether and when the Coordinator should develop the Rule Change
Proposal or if the Coordinator should provide the support or assistance
requested by the other party; and

\(e\) whether and how the Market Advisory Committee will be consulted
during the development of the Rule Change Proposal,

and take into account any advice, comments or objections provided by any
member or observer of the Market Advisory Committee in deciding whether,
when and how to develop the Rule Change Proposal or provide material
support or assistance to another party to develop the Rule Change
Proposal.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.5.1D sets out new requirements for consultation where AEMO
or a Network Operator wish to make a Rule Change Proposal that affects a
WEM Technical Standard. See also new clause 2.8.14.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.5.1D. Where AEMO or a Network Operator wishes to make a Rule Change
Proposal that may directly or indirectly affect a WEM Technical
Standard, then, without limiting any other requirements applying to a
Rule Change Proposal in these WEM Rules or a WEM Procedure, AEMO or the
Network Operator must, before making the Rule Change Proposal:

\(a\) where AEMO wishes to make a Rule Change Proposal, AEMO must
consult in good faith with each Network Operator that may be directly or
indirectly affected by the relevant proposed Amending Rules; and

\(b\) where a Network Operator wishes to make a Rule Change Proposal,
the Network Operator must consult in good faith with AEMO and each other
Network Operator that may be directly or indirectly affected by the
relevant proposed Amending Rules.

2.5.2. The Minister may issue a statement of policy principles to the
Coordinator with respect to the development of the market. The statement
of policy principles must not be inconsistent with the Wholesale Market
Objectives. Before giving a statement of policy principles, the Minister
may provide a draft of the proposed statement to the Market Advisory
Committee and seek the Market Advisory Committee’s views on it.

2.5.3. The Coordinator must have regard to any statement of policy
principles given by the Minister in making Amending Rules in accordance
with this Chapter.

2.5.3A. The Coordinator must have regard to any advice received from the
Market Advisory Committee regarding the evolution or the development of
the Wholesale Electricity Market or these WEM Rules.

2.5.3B. The independent Chair of the Market Advisory Committee may
develop and submit Rule Change Proposals based on advice received from
the Market Advisory Committee regarding the development of the Wholesale
Electricity Market or these WEM Rules.

2.5.4. Where the Coordinator considers that a change to the WEM Rules is
required, the Coordinator may develop a Rule Change Proposal and must
publish it in accordance with clause 2.5.7.

2.5.5. Where necessary, the Coordinator may contact the person
submitting a Rule Change Proposal and request clarification of any
aspect of the Rule Change Proposal. Any clarification received is to be
deemed to be part of the Rule Change Proposal.

2.5.6. Within five Business Days of the later of:

\(a\) receiving the Rule Change Proposal; and

\(b\) any clarification under clause 2.5.5,

the Coordinator must:

\(c\) decide whether to progress the Rule Change Proposal any further;
and

\(d\) notify the person who submitted the Rule Change Proposal whether
the Coordinator will progress the Rule Change Proposal any further.

2.5.7. When it has developed a Rule Change Proposal, or within seven
Business Days of receiving a Rule Change Proposal under clause 2.5.1,
the Coordinator must publish notice of the Rule Change Proposal on the
Coordinator's Website. The notice must include:

\(a\) the date that the Rule Change Proposal was submitted, if
applicable;

\(b\) the name, and where relevant, the organisation, of the person who
made the Rule Change Proposal;

\(c\) details of the Rule Change Proposal, including relevant references
to clauses of the WEM Rules and any proposed specific changes to those
clauses;

\(d\) the description of how the rule change would allow the WEM Rules
to better address the Wholesale Market Objectives given by the person
submitting the proposed rule change;

\(e\) whether the Rule Change Proposal will be progressed and the reason
why the Rule Change Proposal will or will not be progressed; and

\(f\) if the Rule Change Proposal will be progressed further:

i\. whether the Rule Change Proposal is to be subject to the Fast Track
Rule Change Process in accordance with clause 2.5.9 and the reasons for
this decision;

ii\. if the Rule Change Proposal is subject to the Fast Track Rule
Change process, and the Rule Change Proposal did not include proposed
specific changes to clauses, the Coordinator’s proposed Amending Rules
to implement the Rule Change Proposal; and

iii\. if the Rule Change is not subject to the Fast Track Rule Change
process, a call for submissions in relation to the Rule Change Proposal.
The due date for submissions must be:

1\. 30 Business Days after the notification; or

2\. if a longer timeframe is determined in accordance with clause
2.5.10, at a time that is consistent with that timeframe.

2.5.8. Where a Rule Change Proposal that will be progressed relates to a
Protected Provision the Coordinator must notify the Minister at the same
time as it gives the notice described in clause 2.5.7.

2.5.8A. A decision by the Coordinator to accept a Rule Change Proposal
(in proposed or modified form), which was initiated by the Coordinator,
does not take effect until it receives the Minister’s approval.

2.5.9. The Coordinator may subject a Rule Change Proposal to the Fast
Track Rule Change Process if, in her or his opinion, the Rule Change
Proposal:

\(a\) is of a minor or procedural nature; or

\(b\) is required to correct a manifest error; or

\(c\) is urgently required and is essential for either:

i\. the safe operation; or

ii\. the effective operation; or

iii\. the reliable operation,

of the market or the SWIS.

2.5.10. Subject to clause 2.5.12, the Coordinator may at any time after
deciding to progress a Rule Change Proposal decide to extend the normal
timeframe for processing Rule Change Proposals. If the Coordinator
decides to do so, then she or he may modify the times and time periods
under sections 2.6, 2.7 or 2.8 in respect of the Rule Change Proposal
and publish details of the modified times and time periods.

2.5.11. If a Rule Change Proposal was subject to the Fast Track Rule
Change Process, and the Coordinator decides to extend the timeframe, she
or he must either:

\(a\) extend the timeframe by no more than 15 Business Days; or

\(b\) reclassify the Rule Change Proposal as not being subject to the
Fast Track Rule Change Process, and must progress it in accordance with
section 2.7.

2.5.12. The Coordinator must publish a notice of an extension determined
in accordance with clause 2.5.10, and must update any information
already published in accordance with clause 2.5.7(f).

2.5.13. A notice of extension must include:

\(a\) the reasons for the proposed extension;

\(b\) the views of any Rule Participants consulted on the extension;

\(c\) the proposed length of any extension; and

\(d\) the proposed work program.

2.5.14. A Rule Change Proposal that the Coordinator decides is subject
to the Fast Track Rule Change Process is to be progressed in accordance
with section 2.6, and section 2.7 does not apply.

2.5.15. A Rule Change Proposal that the Coordinator decides is not
subject to the Fast Track Rule Change Process is to be progressed in
accordance with section 2.7, and section 2.6 does not apply.

2.6. Fast Track Rule Change Process

2.6.1. Within five Business Days of publishing the notice referred to in
clause 2.5.7, the Coordinator must notify those Rule Participants or
members of the Market Advisory Committee that she or he considers have
an interest in the Rule Change Proposal of her or his intention to
consult with them concerning the Rule Change Proposal.

2.6.2. Within five Business Days of publishing the notice referred to in
clause 2.5.7, a Rule Participant may notify the Coordinator that they
wish to be consulted concerning the Rule Change Proposal.

2.6.3. Within 15 Business Days of publishing the notice referred to in
clause 2.5.7, the Coordinator must have completed such consultation as
the Coordinator considers appropriate in the circumstances with the Rule
Participants described in clauses 2.6.1 and 2.6.2.

2.6.3A. Within 20 Business Days of publishing the notice referred to in
clause 2.5.7, the Coordinator must:

\(a\) decide whether to:

i\. accept the Rule Change Proposal in the proposed form; or

ii\. accept the Rule Change Proposal in a modified form; or

iii\. reject the Rule Change Proposal; and

\(b\) prepare and publish a Final Rule Change Report on the Rule Change
Proposal.

2.6.4. The Final Rule Change Report must contain:

\(a\) the information in the notice of the Rule Change Proposal under
clause 2.5.7;

\(b\) any analysis of the Rule Change Proposal that the Coordinator has
carried out;

\(c\) the identities of Rule Participants that were consulted;

\(d\) information on any objections expressed by the Rule Participants
consulted, and the Coordinator’s response to the objections;

\(e\) the Coordinator’s assessment of the Rule Change Proposal in light
of clauses 2.4.2 and 2.4.3;

\(f\) the decision made by the Coordinator under clause 2.6.3A(a) on the
Rule Change Proposal;

\(g\) the Coordinator’s reasons for the decision; and

\(h\) if the Coordinator decides to make Amending Rules arising from the
Rule Change Proposal:

i\. the wording of the Amending Rules; and

ii\. the proposed date and time that the Amending Rules will commence.

2.7. Standard Rule Change Process

2.7.1. Any person may make a submission to the Coordinator relating to a
Rule Change Proposal within the time frame specified under clause
2.5.7(f)(iii).

2.7.2. Subject to its obligations of confidentiality under these WEM
Rules and otherwise, the Coordinator must release to the public all
information submitted under clause 2.7.1.

2.7.3. The Coordinator may hold public forums or workshops concerning a
Rule Change Proposal.

2.7.4. Within one Business Day after the publication of a notice of a
Rule Change Proposal in accordance with clause 2.5.7, the Coordinator
must notify the members and observers of the Market Advisory Committee
as to whether the Coordinator considers the Rule Change Proposal
requires convening a meeting of the Market Advisory Committee and the
reasons why.

2.7.5. The independent Chair of the Market Advisory Committee must
convene a meeting of the Market Advisory Committee concerning a Rule
Change Proposal before the due date for submissions in relation to the
Rule Change Proposal if:

\(a\) the independent Chair or the Coordinator considers that advice on
the Rule Change Proposal is required from the Market Advisory Committee;
or

\(b\) two or more members of the Market Advisory Committee have informed
the independent Chair in writing that they consider that advice on the
Rule Change Proposal is required from the Market Advisory Committee.

2.7.6. Within 20 Business Days following the close of submissions, the
Coordinator must:

\(a\) prepare and publish a Draft Rule Change Report on the Rule Change
Proposal; and

\(b\) publish a deadline for further submissions in relation to the Rule
Change Proposal, where that deadline must be at least 20 Business Days
after the date the deadline is published.

2.7.7. The Draft Rule Change Report must contain:

\(a\) the information in the notice of the Rule Change Proposal under
clause 2.5.7;

\(b\) all submissions received before the due date for submissions, a
summary of those submissions, and the Coordinator’s response to issues
raised in those submissions (and the report may in the Coordinator’s
discretion contain any or all of this material in respect of a
submission received after the due date);

\(c\) a summary of any public forums or workshops held;

(cA) a summary of any advice provided by AEMO or a Network Operator
under clause 2.4.3C, and reasons if the Coordinator does not propose to
follow partially or fully the advice;

\(d\) a summary of the views expressed by the members of the Market
Advisory Committee where the Market Advisory Committee met to consider
the Rule Change Proposal and, if the Market Advisory Committee has
delegated its role to consider the Rule Change Proposal to a Working
Group under clause 2.3.17(a), a summary of the views expressed by that
Working Group;

(dA) reasons if the Coordinator does not propose to follow partially or
fully the advice received from the Market Advisory Committee;

\(e\) the Coordinator’s assessment of the Rule Change Proposal in light
of clauses 2.4.2 and 2.4.3;

\(f\) a proposal as to whether the Rule Change Proposal should be
accepted in the form proposed. The proposal may be that:

i\. the Rule Change Proposal be accepted in the proposed form; or

ii\. the Rule Change Proposal be accepted in a modified form; or

iii\. the Rule Change Proposal be rejected; and

\(g\) if the Coordinator proposes to make Amending Rules arising from
the Rule Change Proposal:

i\. the wording of the proposed Amending Rules; and

ii\. a proposed date and time the proposed Amending Rules will commence.

2.7.7A. Within 20 Business Days of the deadline specified under clause
2.7.6(b), the Coordinator must:

\(a\) decide whether to:

i\. accept the Rule Change Proposal in the proposed form; or

ii\. accept the Rule Change Proposal in a modified form; or

iii\. reject the Rule Change Proposal; and

\(b\) prepare and publish a Final Rule Change Report on the Rule Change
Proposal.

2.7.8. The Final Rule Change Report must contain:

\(a\) the information in the Draft Rule Change Report;

\(b\) all submissions received before the deadline for submissions
specified in relation to the relevant Draft Rule Change Report under
clause 2.7.6(b), a summary of those submissions, and the Coordinator’s
response to the issues raised in those submissions (and the report may
in the Coordinator’s discretion contain any or all of this material in
respect of a submission received after the deadline);

(bA) reasons if the Coordinator has decided not to follow partially or
fully the advice received from the Market Advisory Committee;

(bB) reasons if the Coordinator has decided not to follow partially or
fully any advice provided by AEMO or a Network Operator under clause
2.4.3C;

\(c\) any further analysis or modification to the Rule Change Proposal;

\(d\) the Coordinator’s assessment of the Rule Change Proposal in light
of clauses 2.4.2 and 2.4.3;

\(e\) the decision made by the Coordinator under clause 2.7.7A(a) on the
Rule Change Proposal;

\(f\) the Coordinator’s reasons for the decision; and

\(g\) if the Coordinator decides to make Amending Rules arising from the
Rule Change Proposal:

i\. the wording of the Amending Rules; and

ii\. the proposed date and time that the Amending Rules will commence.

2.8. Review of Coordinator Rule Amendment Decisions, Ministerial
Approval and Coming into Force of Rule Amendments

2.8.1. A Rule Participant may apply to the Electricity Review Board for
a Procedural Review of a decision by the Coordinator contemplated by
clause 2.5.6(c), 2.5.9, 2.6.3A(a) or 2.7.7A(a) within the time specified
in regulation 44 of the WEM Regulations, on the grounds that the
Coordinator has not followed the rule change process set out in sections
2.5, 2.6 and 2.7.

2.8.2. Following an application for a Procedural Review under clause
2.8.1, if the Electricity Review Board finds that the Coordinator has
not followed the rule change process set out in sections 2.5, 2.6 and
2.7 the Electricity Review Board may set aside the Coordinator’s
decision and direct the Coordinator to reconsider the relevant Rule
Change Proposal in accordance with the process set out in sections 2.5,
2.6 and 2.7.

2.8.3. The Coordinator must submit a Rule Change Proposal, together with
the Final Rule Change Report, to the Minister for approval where
Amending Rules in the Final Rule Change Report:

\(a\) amend or replace a Protected Provision, or, in the Coordinator’s
opinion, would have the effect of changing the meaning or effect of one
or more Protected Provisions; or

\(b\) are subject to the requirements in clause 2.5.8A.

2.8.4. Subject to clause 2.8.6, the Minister must consider the Rule
Change Proposal within 20 Business Days and decide whether the WEM
Rules, as amended or replaced by the proposed Amending Rules, are
consistent with the Wholesale Market Objectives.

2.8.5. Where a Rule Change Proposal is submitted under clause 2.8.3, the
Minister may:

\(a\) approve the proposed Amending Rules;

\(b\) not approve the proposed Amending Rules; or

\(c\) send back to the Coordinator the proposed Amending Rules with any
revisions the Minister considers are required to ensure the WEM Rules,
as amended or replaced by the proposed Amending Rules, are consistent
with the Wholesale Market Objectives.

2.8.6. The Minister may extend the time for a decision on a Rule Change
Proposal under clause 2.8.4 by a further period of up to 20 Business
Days by notice to the Coordinator. The Minister may extend the time for
a decision in respect of a Rule Change Proposal more than once.

2.8.7. The Coordinator must publish notice of any extension under clause
2.8.6 on the Coordinator’s Website.

2.8.8. Where the Minister does not make a decision by the original date
determined in accordance with clause 2.8.4, or by an extended date
determined in accordance with clause 2.8.6, as applicable, then the
proposed Amending Rules will be taken to have been approved by the
Minister.

2.8.9. Where the Minister does not approve the proposed Amending Rules
or sends proposed Amending Rules back to the Coordinator under clause
2.8.5(c), the Minister must give reasons, and the Coordinator must
publish a notice of the Minister’s decision and the reasons given by the
Minister.

2.8.10. Where the Minister sends proposed Amending Rules back to the
Coordinator in accordance with clause 2.8.5(c), the Coordinator must:

\(a\) publish the revised Amending Rules and call for submissions on the
revised Amending Rules within 15 Business Days of publication; and

\(b\) provide a revised Final Rule Change Report, including any
submissions received on the Minister’s revised Amending Rules to the
Minister within 25 Business Days of the close of the consultation period
and clauses 2.8.4 to this clause 2.8.10 apply to the revised Final Rule
Change Report.

2.8.11. Amending Rules are made:

\(a\) for Rule Change Proposals to which clause 2.8.3 applies, when the
Minister has either approved, or is taken by clause 2.8.8 to have
approved, the Amending Rules; and

\(b\) for Rule Change Proposals to which clause 2.8.3 does not apply,
when the Coordinator has decided to make the Amending Rules as notified
under clause 2.6.3A(b) or clause 2.7.7A(b).

2.8.12. Subject to clause 2.8.2, Amending Rules commence at the time and
date determined by the Coordinator. The Coordinator must publish notice
of the time and date Amending Rules commence.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>The list of Protected Provisions has been updated to only include
clauses that contain responsibilities for, or functions of, the
Coordinator or Minister for Energy.</p>
<p>This ensures that the purpose of the Protected Provisions remain
consistent with their original intent – to ensure that where there is a
potential conflict of interest there is Ministerial oversight of the
decision being made – in the context of the current WEM governance
arrangements.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.8.13. The following clauses are Protected Provisions:

\(a\) clauses 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.2.1, 1.4.1, 1.4.2, 1.6.2, 1.7.3A, 1.8.1,
1.8.3, 1.8.4, 1.28.1 to 1.28.3, 1.28.5, 1.28.6, 1.42.2, 1.42.3, 1.42.5
to 1.42.7, 1.42.9, 1.42.10, 1.42.28, 1.43A.2, 1.43A.4 to 1.43A.6;

\(b\) clauses 2.2D.1, 2.3.1, 2.3.2 to 2.3.5A, 2.3.6, 2.3.7A to 2.3.11,
2.3.13, 2.3.16, 2.4.1 to 2.4.4, 2.5.1C, 2.5.2 to 2.5.3A, 2.5.4 to
2.5.15, 2.6.1, 2.6.3, 2.6.4, 2.7.2 to 2.7.4, 2.7.6 to 2.7.8, 2.8.1 to
2.8.14, 2.9.2CB, 2.9.2F, 2.9.4, 2.9.5, 2.9.7C, 2.10.1, 2.10.2A, 2.10.3,
2.10.5E, 2.10.7, 2.10.10, 2.10.12E, 2.10.13, 2.10.17 to 2.10.20, 2.11.1
to 2.11.4, 2.16.2A, 2.16.2D, 2.16.2E, 2.16.6, 2.16.7, 2.16.13A,
2.16.13B, 2.16.13D to 2.16.14, 2.16.15A, 2.21.11, 2.21.12, 2.24.5B to
2.24.5E, 2.24.6A, 2.25.1C, 2.44.1;

\(c\) clauses 3.11A.1 to 3.11A.10, 3.15.1 to 3.15.5, 3.18GA.1 to
3.18GA.3;

\(d\) clauses 4.5A1 to 4.5A16, 4.13B.1 to 4.13B.6, 4.24.19;

\(e\) clauses 10.1.1, 10.2.1, 10.2.1B, 10.2.3, 10.2.6, 10.2.8 to
10.2.12, 10.3.1 to 10.3.4, 10.4.1, 10.4.2, 10.4.5, 10.4.7 to 10.4.11,
10.4.14 to 10.4.26, 10.5.1 to 10.5.14 ; and

\(f\) any other clauses of these WEM Rules that must not be amended,
repealed or replaced without the approval of the Minister in accordance
with the WEM Regulations.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.8.14 sets out the WEM Technical Standards that are to be
'protected' provisions under the rule change process to ensure that
technical and engineering advice is sought from AEMO and/or Western
Power when any of these clauses are the subject of a Rule Change
Proposal. Some of these clauses do not commence until new market start –
see the transitional provisions in new section 1.52.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.8.14. The following clauses are WEM Technical Standards:

\(a\) section 3.1;

\(b\) clause 3.2.5;

\(c\) clauses 3.3.3 and 3.4.3;

\(d\) section 3.6;

\(e\) section 3.7;

\(f\) chapter 3A and appendix 12; and

\(g\) chapter 3B.

2.9. WEM Procedures

2.9.1. \[Blank\]

2.9.2. \[Blank\]

2.9.2A. AEMO must manage the development of, amendment of, and
replacement for WEM Procedures which these WEM Rules require be
developed by AEMO.

2.9.2B. The Economic Regulation Authority must manage the development
of, amendment of, and replacement for WEM Procedures which these WEM
Rules require to be developed by the Economic Regulation Authority.

2.9.2C. \[Blank\]

2.9.2CA. Each Network Operator must manage the development of, amendment
of, and replacement for WEM Procedures which these WEM Rules require be
developed by a Network Operator.

2.9.2CB. The Coordinator must manage the development, amendment and
replacement of any WEM Procedures which these WEM Rules require be
developed and maintained by the Coordinator.

2.9.2D. AEMO must develop and maintain on the WEM Website a list of all
WEM Procedures that AEMO is required to develop or maintain under the
WEM Rules. For each WEM Procedure the list must:

\(a\) state the name of the WEM Procedure;

\(b\) give a brief description of the WEM Procedure; and

\(c\) specify:

i\. each head of power clause in the WEM Rules pursuant to which the WEM
Procedure has been developed; and

ii\. if not already covered under clause 2.9.2D(c)(i), each clause in
the WEM Rules which requires that an obligation, process or requirement
be documented in a WEM Procedure, that has been documented in that WEM
Procedure.

2.9.2E. AEMO must maintain and keep up to date the list referred to in
clause 2.9.2D.

2.9.2F. The Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator and each
Network Operator must publish any WEM Procedures they are required to
document or develop under these WEM Rules on their respective websites.

2.9.3. WEM Procedures:

\(a\) must:

i\. be developed, amended or replaced in accordance with the process in
these WEM Rules;

ii\. be consistent with the Wholesale Market Objectives; and

iii\. be consistent with these WEM Rules, the Electricity Industry Act
and Regulations; and

\(b\) may be amended or replaced in accordance with section 2.10 and
must be amended or replaced in accordance with section 2.10 where a
change is required to maintain consistency with Amending Rules.

2.9.4. The Coordinator must maintain on the Coordinator's Website a
Procedure Change Submission form.

2.9.5. The Coordinator must develop a WEM Procedure setting out the
procedure for developing and amending WEM Procedures.

2.9.6. \[Blank\]

2.9.7. \[Blank\]

2.9.7A. AEMO must comply with WEM Procedures applicable to it.

2.9.7B. The Economic Regulation Authority must comply with WEM
Procedures applicable to it.

2.9.7C. The Coordinator must comply with WEM Procedures applicable to
it.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.9.7D requires each Network Operator to comply with the WEM
Procedures applicable to it. It is noted that the Network Operator is
already covered by clause 2.9.8, however, Network Operators have been
included as part of this clause to avoid doubt and for consistency with
how AEMO is separately identified.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.9.7D. A Network Operator must comply with WEM Procedures applicable to
it.

2.9.8. A Rule Participant, other than AEMO or a Network Operator, must
comply with WEM Procedures applicable to it.

2.10. Procedure Change Process

2.10.1. AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator or a
Network Operator, as applicable, may initiate the Procedure Change
Process by developing a Procedure Change Proposal.

2.10.2. Rule Participants may notify AEMO, the Economic Regulation
Authority, the Coordinator or the relevant Network Operator, as
applicable, where they consider an amendment to or replacement of a WEM
Procedure would be appropriate.

2.10.2A. Within 20 Business Days of receipt of a notification under
clause 2.10.2, AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator
or the Network Operator, as applicable, must:

\(a\) determine whether the suggested amendment to or replacement of a
WEM Procedure is appropriate; and

\(b\) publish details of whether a Procedure Change Proposal will be
progressed with respect to the suggested amendment to or replacement of
a WEM Procedure and the reasons for that decision on AEMO's, the
Economic Regulation Authority's, the Coordinator's or the Network
Operator's website, as applicable.

2.10.3. If an Amending Rule requires AEMO, the Economic Regulation
Authority, the Coordinator or a Network Operator to develop new WEM
Procedures or to amend or replace existing WEM Procedures, then AEMO,
the Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator or the Network
Operator, as applicable, is responsible for the development of,
amendment of or replacement for, WEM Procedures so as to comply with the
Amending Rule.

2.10.4. \[Blank\]

2.10.5. \[Blank\]

2.10.5A. AEMO must publish Procedure Change Proposals that AEMO
develops.

2.10.5B. The Economic Regulation Authority must publish Procedure Change
Proposals that the Economic Regulation Authority develops.

2.10.5C. \[Blank\]

2.10.5D. A Network Operator must publish Procedure Change Proposals that
the Network Operator develops.

2.10.5E. The Coordinator must publish Procedure Change Proposals that
the Coordinator develops.

2.10.6. A Procedure Change Proposal must include:

\(a\) a proposed WEM Procedure or an amendment to or replacement for a
WEM Procedure , indicating the proposed amended words, or a proposed WEM
Procedure; and

\(b\) the reason for the proposed WEM Procedure or an amendment to or
replacement for a WEM Procedure or proposed WEM Procedure.

2.10.7. At the same time as it publishes a Procedure Change Proposal
notice, AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator or the
Network Operator, as applicable, must publish a call for submissions on
that proposal. The due date for submissions must be 20 Business Days
from the date the call for submissions is published. Any person may make
a submission to AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator
or the Network Operator, as applicable, relating to a Procedure Change
Proposal. A Procedure Change Submission may be made using the Procedure
Change Submission form maintained on the Coordinator’s Website in
accordance with clause 2.9.4.

2.10.8. \[Blank\]

2.10.9. The independent Chair of the Market Advisory Committee must
convene a meeting of the Market Advisory Committee concerning any
Procedure Change Proposal before the due date for submissions in
relation to the Procedure Change Proposal if:

\(a\) the independent Chair, the Coordinator, AEMO or the Economic
Regulation Authority considers that advice on the Procedure Change
Proposal is required from the Market Advisory Committee;

(aA) a Network Operator considers that advice on the Procedure Change
Proposal prepared by a Network Operator is required from the Market
Advisory Committee; or

\(b\) two or more members of the Market Advisory Committee have informed
the independent Chair in writing that they consider that advice on the
Procedure Change Proposal is required from the Market Advisory
Committee.

2.10.10. Following the closing date for submissions, the Coordinator,
AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority or the Network Operator, as
applicable, must prepare a Procedure Change Report on the Procedure
Change Proposal.

2.10.11. \[Blank\]

2.10.12. \[Blank\]

2.10.12A. AEMO must publish Procedure Change Reports that AEMO prepares.

2.10.12B.The Economic Regulation Authority must publish Procedure Change
Reports that the Economic Regulation Authority prepares.

2.10.12C. \[Blank\]

2.10.12D. A Network Operator must publish Procedure Change Reports that
the Network Operator prepares.

2.10.12E. The Coordinator must publish Procedure Change Reports that the
Coordinator prepares.

2.10.13. The Procedure Change Report must contain:

\(a\) the wording of the proposed WEM Procedure or amendment to or
replacement for the WEM Procedure;

\(b\) the reason for the proposed WEM Procedure or amendment to or
replacement for the WEM Procedure;

\(c\) all submissions received before the due date for submissions, a
summary of those submissions, and the response of the Coordinator, AEMO,
the Economic Regulation Authority or the Network Operator, as
applicable, to the issues raised in those submissions;

\(d\) a summary of the views expressed by the Market Advisory Committee
and, if the Market Advisory Committee has delegated its role to consider
the Procedure Change Proposal to a Working Group under clause 2.3.17(a),
a summary of the views expressed by that Working Group;

(dA) whether any advice from the Market Advisory Committee regarding the
Procedure Change Proposal reflects a consensus view or a majority view,
and, if the latter, any dissenting views included in or accompanying the
advice and how these views have been taken into account by the
Coordinator;

\(e\) \[Blank\]

\(f\) \[Blank\]

\(g\) in the case of a Procedure Change Proposal developed by AEMO, a
proposed date and time for the WEM Procedure or amendment or replacement
to commence, which must, in AEMO’s opinion, allow sufficient time after
the date of publication of the Procedure Change Report for Rule
Participants to implement changes required by it;

\(h\) in the case of a Procedure Change Proposal developed by the
Economic Regulation Authority, a proposed date and time for the WEM
Procedure or amendment or replacement to commence, which must, in the
Economic Regulation Authority's opinion, allow sufficient time after the
date of publication of the Procedure Change Report for Rule Participants
to implement changes required by it;

\(i\) in the case of a Procedure Change Proposal developed by a Network
Operator, a proposed date and time for the WEM Procedure or amendment or
replacement to commence, which must, in the Network Operator's opinion,
allow sufficient time after the date of publication of the Procedure
Change Report for Rule Participants to implement changes required by it;
and

\(j\) in the case of a Procedure Change Proposal developed by the
Coordinator, a proposed date and time for the WEM Procedure or amendment
or replacement to commence, which must, in the Coordinator's opinion,
allow sufficient time after the date of publication of the Procedure
Change Report for Rule Participants to implement changes required by it.

2.10.14. \[Blank\]

2.10.15. \[Blank\]

2.10.16. \[Blank\]

2.10.17. If AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator or
a Network Operator, as applicable, considers, at any time after
publishing a Procedure Change Proposal, that it is necessary to extend
the normal timeframes for processing the Procedure Change Proposal
because:

\(a\) issues of sufficient complexity or difficulty have been identified
relating to the Procedure Change Proposal;

\(b\) further public consultation on an issue associated with the
Procedure Change Proposal is required; or

\(c\) the Procedure Change Proposal cannot be dealt with adequately
without an extension because of any other special circumstance,

then AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator or the
Network Operator, as applicable, may modify the times and time periods
under clause 2.10.7 in respect of the Procedure Change Proposal and
publish details of the modified times and time periods.

2.10.18. AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator or a
Network Operator, as applicable, must publish a notice of an extension
determined in accordance with clause 2.10.17 and must update any
information already published in accordance with clause 2.10.7.

2.10.19. A notice of extension under clause 2.10.18 must include:

\(a\) the reasons for the proposed extension;

\(b\) the views of any Rule Participant consulted on the extension;

\(c\) the proposed length of any extension; and

\(d\) the proposed work program.

2.11. Coming into Force of Procedure Amendments

2.11.1. A Rule Participant may apply to the Electricity Review Board for
a Procedural Review of a decision by AEMO, the Economic Regulation
Authority, the Coordinator or a Network Operator, as applicable,
contemplated by clauses 2.10.2A(a) or 2.10.13 within the time specified
in regulation 44 of the WEM Regulations, on the grounds that AEMO, the
Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator or the Network Operator,
as applicable, has not followed the process set out in section 2.10 or
the WEM Procedure specified in clause 2.9.5.

2.11.2. Following an application for a Procedural Review under clause
2.11.1, if the Electricity Review Board finds that AEMO, the Economic
Regulation Authority, the Coordinator or a Network Operator has not
followed the process set out in section 2.10 or the WEM Procedure
specified in clause 2.9.5, the Electricity Review Board may set aside
AEMO's decision, the Economic Regulation Authority’s decision, the
Coordinator's decision or the Network Operator’s decision and direct
AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator or the Network
Operator to reconsider the relevant Procedure Change Proposal in
accordance with section 2.10 and the WEM Procedure specified in clause
2.9.5.

2.11.3. Subject to clauses 2.11.2 and 2.11.4, a WEM Procedure or an
amendment of or replacement for a WEM Procedure commences at the time
and date specified under clauses 2.10.13(g), 2.10.13(h), 2.10.13(i) or
2.10.13(j) (as applicable).

2.11.4. If at any time, AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority, the
Coordinator or a Network Operator considers that Rule Participants will
not have sufficient time to implement any necessary changes required by
the WEM Procedure that AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority, the
Coordinator or the Network Operator, as applicable, are required to
publish, or amendment or replacement of the WEM Procedure, then AEMO,
the Economic Regulation Authority, the Coordinator or the Network
Operator, as applicable, may extend the time and date when that WEM
Procedure, amendment or replacement commences by publishing notice of
the revised time and date when the amendment of or replacement for that
WEM Procedure commences.

Monitoring, Enforcement and Audit

2.12. \[Blank\]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>The compliance and enforcement regime under Chapter 3A is bespoke to
Chapter 3A. As such, the existing general monitoring and compliance
provisions are amended to recognise the regime under Chapter 3A.</p>
<p>As a result of substantial re-ordering of the clauses in section
2.13, the section is to be deleted and replaced.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement

ERA monitoring of compliance

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.1 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.2 and amended to
explicitly require the ERA to monitor Network Operators’ behaviour for
compliance with the WEM Rules and the WEM Procedures for consistency
with the existing approach for AEMO.</p>
<p>It is noted that the Network Operator was already covered by the
existing clause.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.1. The Economic Regulation Authority must monitor other Rule
Participants’ behaviour (including AEMO’s and each Network Operator’s
behaviour) for compliance with the WEM Rules and WEM Procedures in
accordance with the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.15.1.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.2 is a new clause that contains ERA's obligation to
investigate behaviour which results in the market not functioning
effectively. It has been moved from clause 2.16.9 to a stand-alone
clause to better clarify that monitoring the market for inefficient
market outcomes is the ERA’s responsibility.</p>
<p>Clause 2.13.2 will be further reviewed to account for the decisions
made in Energy Sector Governance: Proposed Changes to the Regulatory
Framework which are proposed to commence on 1 July 2021.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.2. The Economic Regulation Authority must investigate any market
behaviour of a Rule Participant if it considers that the behaviour has
resulted in the market not functioning effectively.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.3 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.3 and amended for
consistency with the drafting approach in other similar
clauses.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.3. The Economic Regulation Authority must ensure it has processes
and systems in place to allow it to monitor Rule Participants’ behaviour
(including AEMO’s and each Network Operator’s behaviour) for compliance
with the WEM Rules and WEM Procedures in accordance with the WEM
Procedure referred to in clause 2.15.1.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.4 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.3A and is amended
for drafting consistency and to clarify that the assistance provided by
AEMO under the clause does not limit the further assistance the ERA may
request AEMO undertake in accordance with clause 2.13.8.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.4. Without limiting clause 2.13.8, AEMO must co-operate with the
Economic Regulation Authority and facilitate any processes and systems
put in place by the Economic Regulation Authority under clause 2.13.3,
including by providing any market related data, information and document
produced or exchanged in accordance with the WEM Rules or WEM Procedures
in AEMO’s possession or control that the Economic Regulation Authority
has reason to believe may assist the Economic Regulation Authority to
monitor Rule Participants’ behaviour (including AEMO’s and each Network
Operator’s behaviour) for compliance with the WEM Rules and WEM
Procedures.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.5 is a new clause that requires each Network Operator to
co-operate with the ERA, including to facilitate any processes and
systems, and provide information to enable the ERA to perform its
monitoring and compliance functions on the Network Operator.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.5. Each Network Operator must co-operate with the Economic
Regulation Authority and facilitate any processes and systems put in
place by the Economic Regulation Authority under clause 2.13.3,
including by providing any data, information or document in the Network
Operator’s possession or control that the Economic Regulation Authority
would be entitled to receive under Chapter 10 and has reason to believe
may assist the Economic Regulation Authority to monitor the Network
Operator's behaviour for compliance with the provisions of the WEM Rules
and WEM Procedures.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.6 is amended to remove the requirement for the ERA to
disclose the types of market related information provided to it by AEMO,
as amendments to clause 2.16.2A require the information that AEMO must
routinely provide to the ERA to be included in the Market Surveillance
Data Catalogue, which is required to be published on the Coordinator and
ERA’s websites in accordance with 2.16.2A(b). This list should contain
all data required by the ERA for monitoring and compliance purposes, and
will be updated regularly if new information requirements are
identified.</p>
<p>The second part of clause 2.13.6, which requires additional
publication if the ERA requests additional types of market related data,
information or documents in relation to a specific Rule Participant (or
group of Rule Participants) has been retained</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.6 Where the Economic Regulation Authority requests AEMO to provide
the Economic Regulation Authority with market related data, information
or documents in accordance with clause 2.13.4 and the market related
data, information or documents:

\(a\) is not one of the types disclosed in the combined list referred to
in clause 2.16.2A(b); and

\(b\) relate to a specific Rule Participant (or group of Rule
Participants),

then the Economic Regulation Authority must notify that Rule Participant
(or group of Rule Participants).

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.7 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.6, and clause
2.13.9 is amended to incorporate the existing clauses 2.13.9A and
2.13.9B and to outline AEMO’s obligation to monitor Rule Participants’
behaviour.</p>
<p>The intent is that AEMO will actively monitor Rule Participants’
behaviour for compliance against the specified WEM Rules and WEM
procedures. For other rules and procedures, AEMO may become aware of a
suspected breach through its usual market and system operation
activities.</p>
<p>The amendments to 2.13.7(a) and 2.13.7(b) are consequential to
changes to 2.16.2A and 2.16.2AA, requiring AEMO to monitor Rule
Participants behaviour for compliance with the WEM Rules that the ERA
has asked AEMO to monitor. The intent of this policy change is to allow
the ERA more flexibility in the WEM Rules that it requests AEMO to
monitor over time.</p>
<p>The amendments to 2.13.7(e) are for clarity.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

AEMO monitoring of compliance

2.13.7. AEMO must, in accordance with the WEM Procedure referred to in
clause 2.15.4:

\(a\) monitor Rule Participant’s behaviour for compliance with the WEM
Rules specified in the list referred to in clause 2.16.2A(aA);

\(b\) \[Blank\]

\(c\) ensure it has processes and systems in place to enable it to
monitor Rule Participant's behaviour in accordance with clause 2.13.7(a)
and in accordance with the list of WEM Rules that AEMO must monitor for
compliance provided under clause 2.16.2A(aA) including developing
systems for monitoring;

\(d\) support the Economic Regulation Authority's monitoring of Rule
Participants’ behaviour, including having processes and systems to
provide the Economic Regulation Authority with data, information,
documents or analysis under clauses 2.13.4, 2.13.7, 2.13.8(a), 2.13.8(b)
or 2.13.14, as applicable; and

\(e\) subject to clause 2.13.12, record and report to the Economic
Regulation Authority any alleged breach of the WEM Rules or WEM
Procedures resulting from its monitoring under clause 2.13.7(a).

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.8 is a new clause that allows the ERA to request AEMO to
provide further information, or undertake specific analysis to assist it
to monitor Rule Participants’ behaviour for compliance with the WEM
Rules and WEM Procedures.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.8. Where the Economic Regulation Authority has reason to believe
AEMO may be able to assist it to monitor Rule Participants’ behaviour
(including each Network Operator’s behaviour) for compliance with the
WEM Rules and WEM Procedures, it may request AEMO to:

\(a\) undertake analysis of any market related data, information and
document produced or exchanged under clause 2.13.4; or

\(b\) provide any specific market related data, information and document
produced or exchanged in accordance with the WEM Rules or WEM Procedures
in AEMO’s possession or control not provided by AEMO to the Economic
Regulation Authority under clause 2.13.4,

to assist to monitor a Rule Participant's compliance with a specific
obligation or requirement. For the avoidance of doubt, the Economic
Regulation Authority is not permitted to delegate the monitoring of Rule
Participant behaviour to AEMO.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.9 is a new clause that requires AEMO to comply with a
request by the ERA under new clause 2.13.8.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.9. AEMO must comply with a request by the Economic Regulation
Authority under clause 2.13.8 by the time specified in the request,
which must be a reasonable time having regard to the nature of the
request, or such alternative time as mutually agreed.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.10 is a new clause that clarifies that AEMO is not
required to monitor Network Operators’ compliance with any WEM
Procedures developed by the Network Operator. In accordance with clause
2.13.23, a Network Operator must self-report its own breaches, or
suspected breaches, of any WEM Rules or WEM Procedures developed by
it.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.10. Subject to clause 2.13.7(b), AEMO is not required to monitor a
Network Operator’s behaviour for compliance with the WEM Procedures
developed by the Network Operator.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.11 is a new clause that reflects the policy intent that
any deviations by a Registered Facility within the Tolerance Range or
Facility Tolerance Range applicable to the Registered Facility will not
be considered to be non-compliant with the relevant Dispatch
Instruction.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.11. Where a Registered Facility operates within the Tolerance Range
or Facility Tolerance Range applicable to the Registered Facility during
a Dispatch Interval, any deviation is not considered to be a breach of
clause 7.10.1 or of a provision of section 3.21 by reason of the
deviation only.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.12 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.6B and is
amended to reflect when AEMO is not required to report alleged breaches
to the ERA.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.12. AEMO is not required to report to the Economic Regulation
Authority an alleged breach by a Rule Participant of:

\(a\) section 3.21 if the alleged breach is limited to occurring within
a single Trading Interval and the extent of the alleged breach is either
within the Tolerance Range of the Facility Tolerance Range for that
Facility; or

\(b\) section 7.10 if the alleged breach does not exceed six consecutive
Dispatch Intervals unless the alleged breach is considered by AEMO, in
its reasonable opinion, to be material or likely to impact Power System
Security or Power System Reliability.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.13(a) ensures that even where AEMO is not required to
report an alleged breach under clause 2.13.12, AEMO is not relieved of
its obligation to monitor Rule Participants’ compliance with the WEM
Rules and WEM Procedures specified in clause 2.13.7.</p>
<p>Clause 2.13.13(c) ensures Rule Participants are not relieved from
their obligation to comply with WEM Rules and WEM Procedures regardless
of whether AEMO is required to report an alleged breach to the
ERA.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.13. Subject to clause 2.13.11, nothing in clause 2.13.12 relieves:

\(a\) AEMO from its obligation to monitor Rule Participants’ compliance
in accordance with clause 2.13.7(a) and clause 2.13.7(b); or

\(b\) Rule Participants from the obligation to fully comply with the WEM
Rules and the WEM Procedures, regardless of whether AEMO is required
under the WEM Rules to report any alleged breach to the Economic
Regulation Authority.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.14 is a new clause that sets out when AEMO is not
required to notify the ERA of breaches.</p>
<p>Situations where AEMO considers it does not need to notify the ERA
will be set out in the AEMO WEM Procedure under 2.15.4.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.14. AEMO may, but is not required to, notify the Economic
Regulation Authority of any alleged breach under clause 2.13.7 or clause
2.13.15 where the Economic Regulation Authority is in possession or
control of any market related data, information or other documents or
analysis that allows the Economic Regulation Authority to identify an
alleged breach of the WEM Rules or WEM Procedures.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.15 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.9C and is
amended to refer to AEMO’s requirement to report alleged breaches to the
ERA being subject to clause 2.13.14, which does not require AEMO to
report alleged breaches that the ERA should already be aware of. This is
to avoid unnecessary duplication of notifications to the ERA. AEMO will
be required to outline in the WEM Procedure the situations where ERA
would already be aware of an alleged breach and therefore notification
by AEMO will not be required. The clause also incorporates the changes
in relation to Generator Performance Standards which will follow 3A
processes.</p>
<p>Please note that even though the ERA may have notice of the alleged
breach though data collection or other means, AEMO is still required to
notify the ERA of all alleged breaches that relate to power system
security and reliability.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.15. Except where clause 2.13.14 applies, where AEMO becomes aware
of an alleged breach of the WEM Rules (other than a provision of the WEM
Rules referred to in clause 2.13.7) or the WEM Procedures developed by
AEMO then it must notify the Economic Regulation Authority in accordance
with the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.15.4.

2.13.15A. Clauses 2.13.13, 2.13.14 and 2.13.15 do not apply in respect
of alleged breaches of clauses 3A.10.6, 3A.11.21(a), 3A.11.21(b),
3A.11.21(c) and 3A.12.2.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.16 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.6D.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

Tolerance Ranges

2.13.16. AEMO may determine the Tolerance Range to apply to all
Facilities for the purpose of AEMO’s reporting of alleged breaches of
clause 7.10.1 or a provision of section 3.21 to the Economic Regulation
Authority. When determining the appropriate Tolerance Range to apply for
all Market Participants, AEMO must:

\(a\) consult with Rule Participants prior to setting the Tolerance
Range; and

\(b\) publish on the WEM Website at least 14 Business Days prior to the
date from which change to the Tolerance Range becomes effective, the
following:

i\. all submissions received from Rule Participants;

ii\. the Tolerance Range; and

iii\. an effective date for the commencement of the Tolerance Range.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.17 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.6E.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.17. AEMO may determine a Facility Tolerance Range to apply to a
specific Facility. A Facility Tolerance Range will apply for a specific
Facility in place of the Tolerance Range determined under clause
2.13.16. When determining the Facility Tolerance Range to apply for the
specific Facility, AEMO must:

\(a\) consult with Market Participants prior to setting the Facility
Tolerance Range; and

\(b\) publish on the WEM Website at least 14 Business Days prior to the
date from which any changes to the Facility Tolerance Range become
effective the following:

i\. the reasons for AEMO’s decision;

ii\. any submissions received from Market Participants;

iii\. the applicable Facility Tolerance Range; and

iv\. an effective date for the commencement of the applicable Facility
Tolerance Range.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.18 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.6F.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.18. AEMO must not show bias towards a Market Participant in respect
to a Facility Tolerance Range.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.19 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.6K.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.19. AEMO must document in a WEM Procedure:

\(a\) the process for determining, consulting on, and reviewing the
Tolerance Range and any Facility Tolerance Ranges under clauses 2.13.16,
2.13.17 and 2.13.21; and

\(b\) matters, events or circumstances that may trigger a review of the
Tolerance Range or a Facility Tolerance Range.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.20 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.6H and is
amended to allow Market Participants to request the ERA to reassess
AEMO’s decision to set or not set a Facility Tolerance Range for the
Market Participant’s Registered Facility.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.20. A Market Participant may request in writing that the Economic
Regulation Authority assess a decision by AEMO in relation to the
determination of a Facility Tolerance Range, for that Market
Participant’s Facility. Following a request:

\(a\) the Economic Regulation Authority must consult with AEMO and the
Market Participant concerning the Facility Tolerance Range;

\(b\) the Economic Regulation Authority may give a direction to AEMO to
set or vary a Facility Tolerance Range where it finds that:

i\. AEMO has not followed the relevant WEM Rules or any relevant WEM
Procedures in relation to determining the Facility Tolerance Range; or

ii\. based on the information provided by the Market Participant and
AEMO, that the Facility Tolerance Range is not reasonable;

> \(c\) the Economic Regulation Authority must use best endeavours to
> complete the assessment within 10 Business Days from receipt of the
> request; and
>
> \(d\) the Economic Regulation Authority must direct AEMO to publish
> any direction provided to AEMO to set or vary a Facility Tolerance
> Range on the WEM Website within five Business Days of issuing that
> direction.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.21 is a new clause that allows the ERA to request AEMO to
review a Tolerance Range or Facility Tolerance Range applicable to a
Registered Facility where the ERA considers the Registered Facility is
able to operate within a tighter range under clause 7.10.2A. For
example, if a Registered Facility is consistently operating at the limit
of the applicable tolerance range, it may indicate the Registered
Facility has more precise controls that may enable it to operate within
a tighter tolerance range.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.21. Where the Economic Regulation Authority reasonably considers
that the Tolerance Range or Facility Tolerance Range applicable to a
Registered Facility is inappropriate having regard to the historical
operation of the Registered Facility and the Market Participant's
compliance with clause 7.10.3, the Economic Regulation Authority must
request AEMO to review the Tolerance Range or Facility Tolerance Range
applicable to the Registered Facility.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.22 is a new clause that clarifies that AEMO must comply
with the ERA’s request and provides it with the power to vary, where
applicable, the relevant tolerance range following its review.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.22. AEMO must comply with a request by the Economic Regulation
Authority under clause 2.13.21, and may vary the applicable Tolerance
Range or any Facility Tolerance Range following its review in accordance
with the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.13.19.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.23 is a new clause that requires Rule Participants to
self-report breaches, or suspected breaches, of the WEM Rules and WEM
Procedures to the ERA. This requirement does not include alleged
breaches of Chapter 3A, which are to be dealt with in accordance with
the processes set out in that chapter.</p>
<p>This clause is under review to whether it will be a civil penalty
provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

Breach reporting

2.13.23 Subject to clause 2.13.26, a Rule Participant (including AEMO
and a Network Operator) who is aware that it has breached, or has
reasonable cause to suspect it may have breached, the WEM Rules or a WEM
Procedure, must notify the Economic Regulation Authority in writing
unless the Economic Regulation Authority has notified the Rule
Participant that the breach or suspected breach is already under
investigation. A Rule Participant may, at any time after notifying the
Economic Regulation Authority, provide updated information to the
Economic Regulation Authority in relation to the breach or suspected
breach.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.24 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.4 and is amended
to remove the requirement for Rule Participants to provide notification
of alleged breaches by other Rule Participants to AEMO, and to
explicitly exclude AEMO from the clause as AEMO has mandatory reporting
obligations of alleged breaches to the ERA under other clauses.</p>
<p>The clause refers to Network Operators for clarity, and to remove the
discretionary requirement for Rule Participants to self-report alleged
breaches, which is now mandatory under clause 2.13.23.</p>
<p>The clause also requires the Rule Participant that is reporting
another Rule Participant’s suspected breach to provide evidence of the
alleged breach to the ERA. The required information a Rule Participant
must provide when reporting an alleged breach will be specified in the
WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.15.1.</p>
<p>For the avoidance of doubt, a Rule Participant is not required to
report another Rule Participant's suspected breach.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.24. A Rule Participant (other than AEMO, but including each Network
Operator) may inform the Economic Regulation Authority in writing if it
considers that another Rule Participant has breached the WEM Rules or a
WEM Procedure, and must provide reasonable information in support of
that alleged breach.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.25 is a new clause that provides that self-reported
alleged breaches of the WEM Rules or WEM Procedures by Rule Participants
under clause 2.13.23 may be made using the form to be published by the
ERA, or, alternatively, if the form is not used, to require Rule
Participants to provide the information described in the ERA’s WEM
Procedure under clause 2.15.1.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.25. A notification of an alleged breach by a Rule Participant to
the Economic Regulation Authority under clause 2.13.23 or clause 2.13.24
may be provided in the form described in clause 2.15.3, but must include
the information a Rule Participant is required to provide in reporting
an alleged breach as specified in the WEM Procedure referred to in
clause 2.15.1.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.26 is a new clause that requires Market Participants to
follow the self-reporting processes set out in Chapter 3A, where the
alleged breach is of a provision in that chapter.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.26. Where a Market Participant considers that it has been
non-compliant, or has reasonable cause to suspect it may have been
non-compliant, with a Registered Generator Performance Standard or the
Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO for its Transmission
Connected Generating System, the Market Participant must follow the
relevant process set out in Chapter 3A.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.27 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.10 and is
amended to remove the requirement for the ERA to investigate all alleged
breaches it becomes aware of. Instead, the ERA will be required to
record all alleged breaches, assign a risk rating to each alleged breach
in accordance with the process to be set out in the WEM Procedure
referred to in clause 2.15.1 (Monitoring Protocol), and investigate
alleged breaches that are required to be investigated as per the risk
rating assigned to them. The ERA will also have the discretion to
investigate any alleged breaches not required to be investigated in
accordance with the risk rating to be applied to them.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

Compliance investigation

2.13.27. Subject to section 3A.12, if the Economic Regulation Authority
becomes aware of an alleged breach of the WEM Rules or WEM Procedures,
then:

\(a\) it must record the alleged breach;

\(b\) subject to clause 2.13.32, it must investigate the alleged breach
in accordance with the risk rating assigned to the type of alleged
breach in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.15.1;

\(c\) notwithstanding clause 2.13.27(b), subject to clause 2.13.32, it
may investigate the alleged breach where the ERA considers this is
reasonably required;

\(d\) if the Economic Regulation Authority investigates an alleged
breach, and the investigation is not suspended or closed under clause
2.13.33, then it must determine whether a breach of the WEM Rules or WEM
Procedures has occurred; and

\(e\) it must record the results of each investigation.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.28 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.12.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.28. If reasonably required, as part of an investigation into
alleged breaches of the WEM Rules or WEM Procedures, the Economic
Regulation Authority may:

\(a\) require information and records from Rule Participants; and

\(b\) conduct an inspection of a Rule Participant’s equipment.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.29 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.11.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.29. If the Economic Regulation Authority becomes aware of an
alleged breach of the WEM Rules or the WEM Procedures, then it may meet
with the relevant Rule Participant on one or more occasions to discuss
the alleged breach and possible actions to rectify the alleged breach.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.30 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.13 and is
amended to explicitly refer to the requirement for AEMO and Network
Operators to co-operate with ERA investigations.</p>
<p>As with 2.13.13, clause 2.13.30 remains a civil penalty
provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.30. Rule Participants (including AEMO and each Network Operator)
must cooperate with an investigation into an alleged breach of the WEM
Rules or WEM Procedures, including:

\(a\) providing the Economic Regulation Authority with information
requested under clause 2.13.28 relating to the alleged breach in a
timely manner; and

\(b\) allowing reasonable access to equipment for the purpose of an
inspection carried out under clause 2.13.28.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.31 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.13A and is
amended to refer to AEMO and each Network Operator.</p>
<p>As with 2.13.13A, clause 2.13.31 remains a civil penalty
provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.31. A Rule Participant (including AEMO and each Network Operator)
must not engage in conduct under clause 2.13.30 that is false or
misleading in a material particular.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.32 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.14.</p>
<p>As with 2.13.14(a), clause 2.13.32(a) remains a civil penalty
provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.32. Where a Rule Participant does not comply with clause 2.13.30,
the Economic Regulation Authority may appoint a person to investigate
the matter and provide a report or such other documentation as the
Economic Regulation Authority may require. If the Economic Regulation
Authority does so, then:

\(a\) the Rule Participant must assist the person to undertake the
investigation and prepare the report or other documentation; and

\(b\) the cost of the investigation and the preparation of the report or
other documentation must be met by the Rule Participant unless the
Economic Regulation Authority determines otherwise.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.33 is a new clause that allows the ERA to suspend or
close an investigation of an alleged breach where the alleged breach is
self-reported and the relevant Rule Participant has rectified the
alleged breach, agrees to rectify the alleged breach and, if required by
the ERA, take actions that will reduce the risk of the alleged breach
reoccurring.</p>
<p>Clause 2.13.33(b) provides a head of power for any other alleged
breaches that are to be excluded from the formal investigation process
to be specified in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.15.1
(Monitoring Protocol).</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.33. The Economic Regulation Authority may suspend or close an
investigation of an alleged breach:

\(a\) where the alleged breach is self-reported to the Economic
Regulation Authority by a Rule Participant under clause 2.13.23, and the
Economic Regulation Authority is reasonably satisfied that:

i\. where the breach can be rectified, the Rule Participant:

1\. has rectified the alleged breach; or

2\. undertakes to rectify the alleged breach by taking actions agreed to
by the Economic Regulation Authority; and

ii\. where required by the Economic Regulation Authority, the Rule
Participant agrees to take actions agreed to by the Economic Regulation
Authority that are intended to prevent a recurrence of the alleged
breach; or

\(b\) in any other circumstances that may be specified in the WEM
Procedure referred to in clause 2.15.1.

2.13.34. If the Economic Regulation Authority suspends or closes an
investigation in accordance with clause 2.13.33 it must notify the
relevant Rule Participant.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.35 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.16 and is
amended to remove the requirement for the ERA to determine whether a
breach has taken place as obligation for the ERA to make a determination
is set out in clause 2.13.27(d).</p>
<p>The amended clause requires the ERA to notify Rule Participants where
it is determined a breach has not taken place.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.35. Where the Economic Regulation Authority determines a breach has
not taken place, the Economic Regulation Authority must notify its
decision to the Rule Participant that reported the alleged breach in
accordance with clause 2.13.23.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.36 is a new clause that describes the enforcement actions
the ERA may take following its determination that a breach has taken
place. The clause is caveated as the WEM Regulations have not been
amended to provide for the ERA's ability to make the infringements,
orders and penalties referred to in this clause yet.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

Enforcement action

2.13.36. Where the Economic Regulation Authority determines that a
breach of the WEM Rules or WEM Procedures has occurred in accordance
with clause 2.13.27(d), the Economic Regulation Authority may:

\(a\) issue a warning to the Rule Participant to rectify the
contravention and record the response of the Rule Participant to any
warning issued under this clause. The warning must:

i\. identify the clause or clauses of the WEM Rules or the WEM
Procedures that the Economic Regulation Authority believes has been, or
are being, contravened;

ii\. describe the behaviour that comprises the contravention;

iii\. where the Economic Regulation Authority considers relevant,
request an explanation; and

iv\. where the Economic Regulation Authority considers relevant, request
that the contravention be rectified and specify a time (which the
Economic Regulation Authority considers reasonable) by which the
contravention should be rectified;

\(b\) \[Blank\]

\(c\) issue a civil penalty notice where the contravention relates to a
Category A, Category B or Category C WEM Rule, in accordance with the
WEM Regulations; and

\(d\) apply to the Electricity Review Board for one or more orders by
the Electricity Review Board under regulation 33 of the WEM Regulations.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.37 is a new clause that allows the ERA to seek one or
more of the following orders from the Electricity Review Board
(regulations 33(1)(e), 33(1)(f) or 33(1)(g)):</p>
<ul>
<li><p>an order suspending the Rule Participant’s registration for a
specified period or suspending any other specified right of the Rule
Participant under the WEM Rules for a specified period;</p></li>
<li><p>an order that the Rule Participant’s generating system or
transmission or distribution system, or other facilities or loads, be
disconnected; or</p></li>
<li><p>an order that the Rule Participant’s registration be
cancelled.</p></li>
</ul></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.37. \[Blank\]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.38 is a provides that the orders the ERA is able to make
under clause 2.13.36(d) are set out in the WEM Regulations. The clause
contains a caveat as the WEM Regulations have not yet been amended to
provide for the ERA's ability to make the orders referred to in clause
2.13.36.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.38. \[Blank\]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.39 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.23.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.39. The orders that the Electricity Review Board may make for a
breach of the WEM Rules and the matters the Electricity Review Board
must have regard to before making an order are set out in the WEM
Regulations.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.40 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.24.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.40. The Economic Regulation Authority may direct a Rule Participant
to do or to refrain from doing anything that the Economic Regulation
Authority thinks necessary or desirable to give effect or to assist in
giving effect to any order of the Electricity Review Board.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.41 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.25.</p>
<p>As with 2.13.25, clause 2.13.41 remains a civil penalty
provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.41. A Rule Participant must comply with a direction of the Economic
Regulation Authority given under clause 2.13.40.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.42 is a new clause that sets out the matters the ERA must
have regard to before the ERA issues an infringement notice, a civil
penalty notice or an order (that it is able to issue).</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.42. Before the Economic Regulation Authority issues a civil penalty
notice under clause 2.13.36(c), the Economic Regulation Authority must
have regard to all relevant matters, including:

\(a\) the nature and extent of the breach, including whether the breach
is ongoing;

\(b\) whether the Rule Participant has self-reported or has taken any
mitigating actions;

\(c\) the nature and extent of any loss or damage suffered as a result
of the breach;

\(d\) the impact and potential impact of the breach on the market and
the power system;

\(e\) the circumstances in which the breach took place;

\(f\) whether the relevant Rule Participant has previously been found by
the Economic Regulation Authority, or the Electricity Review Board in
proceedings under the Electricity Industry Act, to have engaged in any
similar conduct; and

\(g\) whether a daily amount, as provided for under the WEM Regulations,
should be imposed in the circumstances, which must include consideration
of:

i\. the financial impact of the total civil penalty on the Rule
Participant, if a daily amount were to be imposed; and

ii\. any benefit gained by the Rule Participant as a result of the
breach.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.43 is a new clause that requires the ERA to inform AEMO
where the ERA issues a financial penalty. This information is needed to
be passed on to AEMO for market settlement purposes.</p>
<p>Financial penalties will be distributed in accordance with Chapter
9.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.43. If the Economic Regulation Authority issues a civil penalty
notice under clause 2.13.36(c), it must inform AEMO of the determination
and penalty amount to assist with the settlement processes in Chapter 9.

2.13.43A. If, during the course of an investigation, the Economic
Regulation Authority has identified a person, other than a Rule
Participant, that has suffered a material loss as a result of a breach,
the Economic Regulation Authority may direct AEMO and/or Rule
Participants to distribute a specified portion of the Civil Penalty
Amount to that person, in a manner that is not consistent with section
9.21.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.44 equivalent to existing clause 2.13.17 and is amended
to extend to decisions by the ERA to issue an infringement notice, civil
penalty notice or order (that it is able to issue) are reviewable
decisions by the Electricity Review Board.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.44. Where the Economic Regulation Authority issues a civil penalty
notice under clause 2.13.36(c), the Rule Participant to whom the civil
penalty notice is issued may seek a review of the Economic Regulation
Authority's decision to issue the civil penalty notice by the
Electricity Review Board in accordance with the WEM Regulations.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.45 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.26 and is
extended to require the six-monthly compliance report to include
investigations completed, notifications of alleged breaches, warning
issued, infringement notices issued, and orders made, by the ERA. Clause
2.13.46 allows the ERA to give consideration to confidential information
in releasing the report. However, the ERA has historically always
published the compliance report.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.45. The Economic Regulation Authority must release a report at
least once every six months setting out a summary for the preceding six
months of:

\(a\) investigations completed by the Economic Regulation Authority;

\(b\) breaches or contraventions of the WEM Rules the Economic
Regulation Authority concludes have occurred;

\(c\) warnings issued by the Economic Regulation Authority under clause
2.13.36(a);

\(d\) proceedings that have been brought before the Electricity Review
Board;

\(e\) findings of the Electricity Review Board on matters referred to
them;

\(f\) orders made by the Electricity Review Board; and

\(g\) unless they have been set aside by the Electricity Review Board,
civil penalties imposed by the Economic Regulation Authority under
clause 2.13.36(c).

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.46 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.27 amended to
update clause references.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.46. In considering the circulation of the report under clause
2.13.45 and 2.13.47, the Economic Regulation Authority must have regard
to the Wholesale Market Objectives.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.47 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.28 and is
amended to refer to the compliance actions taken by the ERA under clause
2.13.36.</p>
<p>Industry feedback suggested new clause 2.13.48 to replace the
existing clause 2.13.57.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.47. In addition to the regular publication described in clause
2.13.45, the Economic Regulation Authority may release a report on any
one or more matters where the Economic Regulation Authority has taken
one or more actions under clause 2.13.36 or which have been referred to
the Electricity Review Board, the findings of the Economic Regulation
Authority and the Electricity Review Board, as applicable, on those
matters and any sanctions imposed by the Economic Regulation Authority
or the Electricity Review Board in relation to those matters.

2.13.48. The Economic Regulation Authority must, and is entitled to,
make available the reports referred to in clauses 2.13.45 or 2.13.47 to
all Rule Participants and interested parties. However, the Economic
Regulation Authority is not required to include details in a report to
such a person if the Economic Regulation Authority considers it is
inappropriate in the circumstances, including without limitation, where
there may be confidentiality issues.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clauses 2.13.49 to 2.13.51 and clause 2.13.53 set out the new regime
with respect to a public register of breaches to be kept by the ERA and
published on its website. The intent is that the threat of publication
of information related to breaches (such as the identity of the
breaching Rule Participant) will encourage Rule Participants’ compliance
with the WEM Rules and WEM Procedures.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

Public register

2.13.49. The Economic Regulation Authority must keep a public register
of:

\(a\) breaches of the WEM Rules where the Economic Regulation Authority
issued a civil penalty notice under clause 2.13.36(c), that was not set
aside by the Electricity Review Board;

\(b\) any other breaches or contraventions of the WEM Rules the Economic
Regulation Authority concludes have occurred where the Economic
Regulation Authority reasonably considers that:

i\. the benefit to the Wholesale Electricity Market in disclosing the
breach outweighs any detriment to the Rule Participant that committed
the breach; or

ii\. whether, having regard to the nature and impact of the breach, in
the Economic Regulation Authority's reasonable opinion, it would expect
a breach to be disclosed on the public register.

2.13.49A. The Economic Regulation Authority must keep a public register
of:

\(a\) investigations commenced by the Economic Regulation Authority of
alleged breaches of these WEM Rules by Rule Participants, provided that
any information identifying Rule Participants is redacted or otherwise
anonymised;

\(b\) investigations closed by the Economic Regulation Authority, where
it was determined by the Economic Regulation Authority that no breach
had occurred, including any reasons for its determination; and

\(c\) investigations closed or suspended by the Economic Regulation
Authority under clause 2.13.33, including its reasons for closing or
suspending the investigation.

2.13.50. Subject to clause 2.13.51, the public register referred to in
clause 2.13.49 must include the following information in relation to
each breach recorded on the public register:

\(a\) the name of the Rule Participant that committed the breach;

\(b\) each provision of the WEM Rules or WEM Procedure that was
breached;

\(c\) all relevant information relating to the time the breach occurred
and duration of the breach, including impacted Trading Days and Dispatch
Intervals as relevant;

\(d\) a summary of any action taken by the Rule Participant to remedy
the breach, or to prevent a recurrence of the breach; and

\(e\) the action taken by the Economic Regulation Authority as a result
of the breach.

2.13.51. Information must not be included in the public register
referred to in clause 2.13.49 if:

\(a\) the relevant Rule Participant has provided evidence to the
Economic Regulation Authority that to do so would contravene a court
order or law suppressing or prohibiting the publication of the
information; or

\(b\) the information has been given a class of confidentiality status
under Chapter 10 of these WEM Rules other than Public.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.52 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.30 and is
extended to information published in the public register of breaches
under clause 2.13.49. Clause 2.13.52 is further amended as a
consequential change to reflect the new framework in Chapter
10.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.52. Claims for confidentiality of information which may be
published under clauses 2.13.45, 2.13.47 or 2.13.53 must be dealt with
in accordance with sections 10.2, 10.4 and 10.5.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>See Explanatory Note at clause 2.13.49.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.53. The public register kept by the Economic Regulation Authority
under clause 2.13.49 must be published on its website.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.13.54 is equivalent to existing clause 2.13.29 and is
extended to information published on the public register of breaches
under clause 2.13.49.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.13.54. No Rule Participant or former Rule Participant is entitled to
make any claim against the Economic Regulation Authority for any loss or
damage incurred by the Rule Participant from the publication of any
information pursuant to clauses 2.13.45, 2.13.47 or 2.13.53 if the
publication was done in good faith. No action or other proceeding will
be maintainable by the person or Rule Participant referred to in the
publication on behalf of or against the Economic Regulation Authority or
any person publishing or circulating the publication on behalf of the
Economic Regulation Authority and this clause operates as a release for
any such publication except where the publication is not done in good
faith.

2.14. Market Audit and Compliance Reports

2.14.1. AEMO must appoint one or more Market Auditors that may be used
to conduct the audit described in clause 2.14.2.

2.14.2. AEMO must ensure that the Market Auditor carries out the audits
of the matters identified under clause 2.14.3 no less than annually.

2.14.3. AEMO must ensure that the Market Auditor carries out the audits
of such matters as AEMO considers appropriate, which must include:

\(a\) the compliance of AEMO’s internal procedures and business
processes with the WEM Rules;

\(b\) AEMO’s compliance with the WEM Rules and WEM Procedures; and

\(c\) AEMO’s market software systems and processes for software
management.

2.14.4. The Market Auditor must provide AEMO with a report, and AEMO
must within 30 Business Days of receiving the report either:

\(a\) accept the report and any recommendations contained in it; or

\(b\) prepare a separate report setting out the matters raised in the
Market Auditor’s report which AEMO accepts and those which it does not
accept and setting out AEMO’s reasons for that view.

2.14.5. AEMO must publish the Market Auditor’s report on the WEM Website
and any report it prepared under clause 2.14.4(b) within 30 Business
Days of receiving the Market Auditor’s report.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.14.5A is amended to require the ERA to publish the report on
ERA’s compliance with WEM Rules and Procedures.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.14.5A. The Economic Regulation Authority must annually provide to the
Minister a report on the Economic Regulation Authority’s compliance with
the WEM Rules and WEM Procedures and publish the report on its website.

2.14.5B. The Economic Regulation Authority must annually prepare a
report for the Minister on AEMO's compliance with the WEM Rules and WEM
Procedures. The report must contain:

\(a\) reports published in clause 2.14.5; and

\(b\) the results of any investigations of AEMO's compliance with the
WEM Rules and WEM Procedures carried out by the Economic Regulation
Authority.

2.14.5C. The Economic Regulation Authority must provide AEMO with the
report prepared in accordance with clause 2.14.5B, and AEMO must within
20 Business Days of receiving the report either:

\(a\) accept the report and any recommendations contained in it; or

\(b\) prepare a separate report setting out the matters raised in the
report which AEMO accepts and those which it does not accept and setting
out AEMO's reasons for that view and provide it to the Economic
Regulation Authority.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.14.5D is amended to require the ERA to publish the
compliance reports provided to the Minister on the ERA’s
website.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.14.5D. The Economic Regulation Authority must, within 10 Business Days
following the date specified in clause 2.14.5C:

\(a\) provide to the Minister the report prepared in accordance with
clause 2.14.5B and any report prepared by AEMO under clause 2.14.5C(b);
and

\(b\) publish the reports provided to the Minister under clause
2.14.5D(a) on its website.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.14.6 is a new clause that requires the ERA to report to the
Minister annually on Network Operators’ compliance with the WEM Rules
and WEM Procedures.</p>
<p>Clauses 2.14.7 to 2.14.10 are new clauses that set out the regime
applying to the compliance reports and mirrors the regime that applies
to AEMO.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.14.6. The Economic Regulation Authority must annually prepare a report
for the Minister on each Network Operator’s self-reported compliance
with the WEM Rules and WEM Procedures. The report must contain the
results of any investigations of each Network Operator’s compliance with
the WEM Rules and WEM Procedures carried out by the Economic Regulation
Authority.

2.14.7. A Network Operator must cooperate with the Economic Regulation
Authority in respect of the Economic Regulation Authority’s preparation
of the report on the Network Operator's compliance with the WEM Rules
and the WEM Procedures under clause 2.14.6, including providing any
information requested by the Economic Regulation Authority for the
purposes of the report.

2.14.8. The Economic Regulation Authority must provide each Network
Operator with that relevant Network Operator’s report prepared by it
under clause 2.14.6, and the relevant Network Operator must within 20
Business Days of receiving the report either:

\(a\) accept the report and any recommendations contained in it; or

\(b\) prepare a separate report setting out the matters raised in the
report which the Network Operator accepts and those which it does not
accept and setting out the Network Operator’s reasons for that view and
provide it to the Economic Regulation Authority.

2.14.9. The Economic Regulation Authority must, within 10 Business Days
following the date specified in clause 2.14.8:

\(a\) provide to the Minister the report prepared in accordance with
clause 2.14.6 and any report prepared by a Network Operator under clause
2.14.8(b); and

\(b\) publish the reports provided to the Minister under clause
2.14.9(a) on its website.

2.14.10. The reports to be prepared by the Economic Regulation Authority
for the Minister under clauses 2.14.5B and 2.14.6 may, at the Economic
Regulation Authority’s discretion, be a single report or multiple
reports. Where a report provided to AEMO or each relevant Network
Operator under clauses 2.14.5C or 2.14.8 contains information in respect
to the compliance of a Rule Participant other than AEMO or the relevant
Network Operator, as applicable, the Economic Regulation Authority must
redact the report to remove the information that does not relate to the
compliance of AEMO or the relevant Network Operator, as applicable.

2.15. Monitoring and Reporting WEM Procedures

2.15.1. The Economic Regulation Authority must maintain and implement a
monitoring protocol in a WEM Procedure.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.15.2 is amended to also refer the ERA’s obligations to
investigate and enforce compliance.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.15.2. The purpose of the WEM Procedure specified in clause 2.15.1 is
to state how the Economic Regulation Authority will implement its
obligations under these WEM Rules to monitor, investigate and enforce
Rule Participants’ behaviour for compliance with the WEM Rules and WEM
Procedures.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.15.3 is deleted and replaced with an amended version that is
consolidated with existing clause 2.15.4 and requires the ERA to set out
the processes with respect to assigning a risk rating to alleged
breaches, for suspending or closing investigations, the matters the ERA
is to take into account when considering whether to issue an
infringement notice, civil penalty notice, or order, the process and
information for a Rule Participant to report an alleged or suspected
breach, the manner for AEMO to provide information requested and the
processes with respect to keeping and publishing a public breach
register.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.15.3. The WEM Procedure specified in clause 2.15.1 must specify:

\(a\) the Economic Regulation Authority’s monitoring processes for
assessing compliance with the WEM Rules and WEM Procedures by Rule
Participants, which must include:

i\. a process for notice to be given by the Economic Regulation
Authority to a Rule Participant that identifies the alleged breach to be
investigated by the Economic Regulation Authority; and

ii\. a process through which a Rule Participant may make submissions to
the Economic Regulation Authority to explain an alleged breach, prior to
the Economic Regulation Authority reaching a decision on whether a Rule
Participant has breached the WEM Rules or WEM Procedures;

\(b\) a process for Rule Participants to report alleged breaches of the
WEM Rules or WEM Procedures under clauses 2.13.15, 2.13.23 and 2.13.24
including the required information a Rule Participant must provide to
the Economic Regulation Authority;

\(c\) the form that may be used by Rule Participants to report a breach,
or suspected breach, of the WEM Rules or WEM Procedures by the Rule
Participant to the Economic Regulation Authority in accordance with
clause 2.15.3(b);

\(d\) the processes for the Economic Regulation Authority to assign a
risk rating to each alleged breach, including the matters the Economic
Regulation Authority will take into account, that will determine whether
the alleged breach is required to be investigated by the Economic
Regulation Authority;

\(e\) the processes for investigations of alleged breaches of the WEM
Rules or WEM Procedures;

\(f\) the processes for suspending or closing investigations of alleged
breaches of the WEM Rules or WEM Procedures under clause 2.13.33,
including the matters the Economic Regulation Authority may take into
account in making a decision;

\(g\) the processes and timeframes applying to a suspended investigation
of an alleged breach of the WEM Rules or WEM Procedures, including the
timeframes under which a suspended investigation may be resumed;

\(h\) guidelines for the Economic Regulation Authority when issuing
warnings about alleged breaches of the WEM Rules or WEM Procedures to
Rule Participants under clause 2.13.36(a);

\(i\) the process for bringing proceedings before the Electricity Review
Board for an order to be made by the Electricity Review Board under the
WEM Regulations;

\(j\) the processes to be followed by the Economic Regulation Authority,
including the matters the Economic Regulation Authority may take into
account and the circumstances it may have regard to, when deciding to
issue a civil penalty notice under clause 2.13.36(c) and determining the
Civil Penalty Amount to be imposed;

\(k\) the processes for keeping a public register of breaches under
clause 2.13.49 and publishing the public register in accordance with
clause 2.13.53;

\(l\) the processes it will require AEMO and the Network Operator to
implement to assist the Economic Regulation Authority in monitoring and
assessing Rule Participants’ compliance with the WEM Rules and WEM
Procedures; and

\(m\) any other relevant matters under sections 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Existing clauses 2.15.6A, 2.15.6B, 2.156C are deleted and replaced
with a new clause 2.15.4 outlining the processes and procedures AEMO
will undertake in carrying out its monitoring and compliance related
obligations under the WEM Rules.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.15.4. AEMO must develop a WEM Procedure to set out:

\(a\) how AEMO will carry out its obligations to monitor Rule
Participants' behaviour for compliance under clause 2.13.7;

\(b\) how AEMO will monitor dispatch compliance before, during or after
a Dispatch Instruction event;

\(c\) how AEMO will carry out its obligations to support the Economic
Regulation Authority under clauses 2.13.4, 2.13.8 and 2.13.9;

\(d\) the notification and reporting processes that AEMO will use to
notify the Economic Regulation Authority under clause 2.13.14 and
2.13.15;

\(e\) the situations where AEMO considers it does not need to notify the
Economic Regulation Authority of an alleged breach under clause 2.13.14;
and

\(f\) any other matters relevant to AEMO’s obligations in section 2.13.

2.16. Monitoring the Effectiveness of the Market

2.16.1. AEMO is responsible for collection of, and providing access to,
data in accordance with this section 2.16. AEMO must compile the data
identified in the Market Surveillance Data Catalogue and provide access
to that data to the Coordinator and the Economic Regulation Authority.

2.16.2. AEMO must develop a Market Surveillance Data Catalogue, which
identifies data to be compiled concerning the market.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Changes to clause 2.16.2A allow the ERA to provide AEMO a list of WEM
Rules that AEMO must monitor for compliance, and new clause 2.16.2AA
allows AEMO and the ERA to negotiate on the types of information
included (based on practicality and cost) and the time and date this
information is provided. The intent of this policy change is to allow
the ERA more flexibility in directing AEMO to monitor compliance with
Rule changes where AEMO is the party best placed to do so, and for this
list of WEM Rules monitoring by AEMO to change over time to remain more
relevant as the market evolves. Transparency will be provided to Market
Participants on the types of information being provided through the
Market Surveillance Data Catalogue (MSDC) and WEM Rules being monitored
by AEMO as both of these will be combined and published as one list for
transparency.</p>
<p>Changes to 2.16.2E and 2.16.2F are consequential to this policy
change.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.16.2A. The Coordinator and the Economic Regulation Authority, as
relevant, must:

\(a\) in the case of the Coordinator and the Economic Regulation
Authority, provide to AEMO a combined list of data items to be included
by AEMO in the Market Surveillance Data Catalogue, being information
required by the Coordinator and the Economic Regulation Authority to
perform their functions under these WEM Rules;

(aA) in the case of the Economic Regulation Authority, provide to AEMO a
list of the WEM Rules that AEMO must monitor for compliance, and is
required to report any alleged breaches of, to the Economic Regulation
Authority; and

\(b\) publish a combined list of the data items under clause 2.16.2A(a)
and WEM Rules under 2.16.2A(aA) on their respective websites.

2.16.2AA. In developing the list of WEM Rules under clause 2.16.2A(aA)
and for any subsequent updates to the list, the Economic Regulation
Authority must, in consultation with AEMO:

\(a\) reach agreement in respect of the proposed date and time for AEMO
to commence monitoring each of the WEM Rules on the list, which must
allow a reasonable time for AEMO to implement any required monitoring
changes; and

\(b\) consider the practicality and cost for AEMO to monitor compliance
with each of the WEM Rules on the list.

2.16.2B. AEMO must provide access to all data items in the Market
Surveillance Data Catalogue, including the items in the combined list of
data items provided to AEMO under clause 2.16.2A(a), to the Coordinator
and the Economic Regulation Authority.

2.16.2C. Where AEMO does not provide access to all of the data items
required to be provided to the Coordinator or the Economic Regulation
Authority through the Market Surveillance Data Catalogue under clause
2.16.2B, AEMO must notify the Coordinator and the Economic Regulation
Authority:

\(a\) of the reasons why the data items are not available; and

\(b\) when AEMO expects that the data items will be available to access
in the Market Surveillance Data Catalogue.

2.16.2D. The Coordinator or the Economic Regulation Authority may
request access to historical versions of data items in the Market
Surveillance Data Catalogue from AEMO. AEMO must provide access to
historical versions of those data items to both the Coordinator and the
Economic Regulation Authority (regardless of who made the request), as
soon as practicable.

2.16.2E. The Coordinator or the Economic Regulation Authority may, from
time to time, request AEMO to include new data items in the Market
Surveillance Data Catalogue, and the Economic Regulation Authority may
update the list of WEM Rules referred to in clause 2.16.2A(aA), by:

\(a\) updating the combined list of data items under clause 2.16.2A(a)
or, in the case of the Economic Regulation Authority, by updating the
list of WEM Rules referred to in clause 2.16.2A(aA), and providing the
updated combined list to AEMO and the Coordinator or Economic Regulation
Authority (as relevant); and

\(b\) publishing the updated combined list of data items and WEM Rules
on their respective websites.

2.16.2F. On receipt of an updated combined list of data items and WEM
Rules under clause 2.16.2E(a) from the Coordinator or the Economic
Regulation Authority, AEMO must update the Market Surveillance Data
Catalogue as applicable, and advise both the Coordinator and the
Economic Regulation Authority of the date on which access to the new
data items will be available.

2.16.3. AEMO must maintain the Market Surveillance Data Catalogue, and
must update it whenever it changes in accordance with clause 2.16.2E.
AEMO must:

\(a\) develop, maintain and provide access to a data dictionary for the
data items in the Market Surveillance Data Catalogue contained in AEMO’s
WEM systems. The data dictionary must:

i\. contain sufficient information to enable a reasonable person to
understand and locate the data items contained in AEMO’s WEM systems;

ii\. define all data items, including a cross reference to the relevant
WEM Rules under which the data is produced or exchanged;

iii\. where applicable, provide details of any preprocessing or analysis
applied to data items; and

iv\. where applicable, provide a means of identifying any revisions of
data items and the timing of any such revisions;

\(b\) maintain the accuracy and quality of all data items to which
access is provided to the Coordinator and the Economic Regulation
Authority in accordance with clause 2.16.2B; and

\(c\) where it becomes aware that any of the data items is incorrect or
inconsistent, correct or make consistent, as applicable, the data item
as soon as practicable.

2.16.4. \[Blank\]

2.16.5. \[Blank\]

2.16.6. Where the Coordinator or the Economic Regulation Authority (as
applicable) considers that it is necessary or desirable for the
performance of its functions under these WEM Rules, the WEM Regulations
or the Electricity Industry Act, or the functions of AEMO under this
section 2.16, the Coordinator or the Economic Regulation Authority (as
applicable) may collect additional information from Rule Participants as
follows:

\(a\) the Coordinator or the Economic Regulation Authority (as
applicable) may issue a notice to one or more Rule Participants
requiring them to provide specified data to the Coordinator or the
Economic Regulation Authority (as applicable) by a date (which the
Coordinator or the Economic Regulation Authority (as applicable)
considers to be reasonable);

\(b\) Market Participants must provide any information requested by the
Coordinator or the Economic Regulation Authority (as applicable) by the
date specified in the notice;

(bA) subject to its obligations of confidentiality under these WEM Rules
or otherwise, the Coordinator must use reasonable endeavours to provide
any information requested by the Economic Regulation Authority by the
date specified in the notice; and

\(c\) the Coordinator or the Economic Regulation Authority (as
applicable) must provide this information to AEMO where the Coordinator
or the Economic Regulation Authority (as applicable) considers that it
is necessary or desirable for the performance of AEMO's functions under
this section 2.16.

2.16.7. Without limitation, additional information that can be collected
by the Coordinator or the Economic Regulation Authority (as applicable)
includes:

\(a\) cost data for Synergy, including actual fuel costs by Trading
Interval;

\(b\) AEMO’s operational records (whether held by AEMO or which AEMO may
require from another person under these WEM Rules), including SCADA
records, of the level of utilisation and fuel related data for each of
Synergy’s Registered Facilities by Trading Interval; and

\(c\) the terms of Bilateral Contracts entered into by Synergy.

2.16.8. Rule Participants may notify AEMO or the Economic Regulation
Authority of behaviour that they consider reduces the effectiveness of
the market, including behaviour related to market power, and the
Economic Regulation Authority, with the assistance of AEMO, must
investigate the behaviour identified in each relevant notification.

2.16.8A. AEMO must notify the Economic Regulation Authority of any
behaviour a Rule Participant notifies it about under clause 2.16.8.

2.16.9. The Economic Regulation Authority must investigate any market
behaviour if it considers that the behaviour has resulted in the market
not functioning effectively. The Economic Regulation Authority, with the
assistance of AEMO, must monitor:

\(a\) the criteria and processes used by AEMO for the procurement of
Essential System Services through the Real-Time Market, the SESSM, and
under any contracts entered into by AEMO; and

\(b\) inappropriate and anomalous market behaviour, including behaviour
related to market power and the exploitation of shortcomings in the WEM
Rules or WEM Procedures by Rule Participants.

2.16.9A. \[Blank\]

2.16.9B. \[Blank\]

2.16.9C. \[Blank\]

2.16.9D. \[Blank\]

2.16.9E. Where the Economic Regulation Authority conducts an
investigation after receiving a notification from a Rule Participant
under clause 2.16.8, or from AEMO under clause 2.16.8A, then, without
limitation, the Economic Regulation Authority must examine any
information provided in the notification, any information or data in its
possession, including any data or information the Economic Regulation
Authority requests from the relevant Rule Participant under clause
2.16.6, or from AEMO under clause 2.16.8, to assist in the
investigation.

2.16.9F. Subject to clause 2.16.9FA, the Economic Regulation Authority
must publish the results of its investigations within six months from
receiving a notification from a Rule Participant under clause 2.16.8, or
from AEMO under clause 2.16.8A. If that day is not a Business Day, then
the next Business Day following that six month period will apply.

2.16.9FA. Subject to clause 2.16.9FB, the Economic Regulation Authority
may extend the timeframe for an investigation under clause 2.16.9E for a
period of up to six months, to the nearest Business Day following that
six month extension period. Where the Economic Regulation Authority
makes such an extension it must publish a notice of the extension on its
website. The Economic Regulation Authority may extend the timeframe for
an investigation more than once.

2.16.9FB. A notice of extension under clause 2.16.9FA must not include
any information identifying the Rule Participant under investigation.

2.16.10. \[Blank\]

2.16.11. The Economic Regulation Authority must provide to the
Coordinator and the Minister a report on the effectiveness of the market
and dealing with the matters identified in clause 2.16.9, if the
Economic Regulation Authority considers that any specific events, or
systemic behaviour or matters have impacted on the effectiveness of the
market.

2.16.12. \[Blank\]

2.16.13. In carrying out its responsibilities under clause 2.16.9(b),
the Economic Regulation Authority must:

\(a\) estimate the prevalence of such behaviour;

\(b\) estimate the cost to end users of such behaviour;

\(c\) estimate the impact of such behaviour on the effectiveness of the
market in meeting the Wholesale Market Objectives;

\(d\) consult with Market Participants on the impacts of such behaviour;

\(e\) estimate the benefits and costs of any recommended measure to
reduce such behaviour. The Economic Regulation Authority:

i\. may use market simulation tools to estimate the benefits and costs;

ii\. must give consideration to:

1\. the probability of success of the measure in reducing the behaviour;

2\. the implications on the efficiency of the market of implementing the
measure; and

3\. the costs of compliance as a result of implementing the measure;

\(f\) where the benefits of any change are estimated to exceed the cost,
make recommendations to the Coordinator and the Minister for
implementing the measures in a report under clause 2.16.11; and

\(g\) provide details of its findings in a report to the Coordinator and
the Minister under clause 2.16.11.

2.16.13A. The Coordinator is responsible for the development of the
market and, with the assistance of the Economic Regulation Authority and
AEMO, must monitor market design problems or inefficiencies.

2.16.13B. In carrying out its responsibilities under clause 2.16.13A,
the Coordinator must also monitor:

\(a\) the effectiveness of the compliance monitoring and enforcement
measures in the WEM Rules and Regulations, including, but not limited
to:

i\. the effectiveness of the Economic Regulation Authority’s
surveillance activities under sections 2.16A to 2.16D; and

ii\. the appropriateness of the parameters for determining a Material
Portfolio and Material Constrained Portfolio under clauses 2.16C.1 and
2.16C.2;

\(b\) the effectiveness of AEMO in carrying out its functions under the
Regulations, the WEM Rules and WEM Procedures;

\(c\) the effectiveness of Network Operators in carrying out their
functions under the WEM Rules and WEM Procedures; and

\(d\) the efficiency and effectiveness of the methodologies for
determining the Market Price Limits and the Benchmark Reserve Capacity
Price.

2.16.13C. If in the performance of its functions under these WEM Rules
the Economic Regulation Authority identifies a market design problem or
inefficiency, the Economic Regulation Authority may provide to the
Coordinator and the Minister a report describing the problem or
inefficiency and must publish the report on its website.

2.16.13D. The Coordinator must provide to the Minister a report dealing
with the matters identified in clauses 2.16.13A and 2.16.13B at least
once in every three years, with the first such report due by 1 July
2025.

2.16.13E. A report referred to in clause 2.16.13D must address, but is
not limited to, the following matters:

\(a\) market trends, which may include:

i\. a summary of the information and data compiled by AEMO and the
Economic Regulation Authority under clause 2.16.1; and

ii\. any other matter or information the Coordinator considers relevant
and appropriate to include;

\(b\) any recommended measures to increase the effectiveness of the
market in meeting the Wholesale Market Objectives to be considered by
the Minister.

2.16.13F. The Coordinator must ensure that an independent person carries
out an audit of the effectiveness of the WEM Rule change process and
Procedure Change Process no less than every three years. The independent
person must provide the Coordinator with a report, and the Coordinator
must within 30 Business Days of receiving the report either:

\(a\) accept the report and any recommendations contained in it; or

\(b\) prepare a separate report setting out the matters raised in the
independent person’s report which the Coordinator accepts and those
which it does not accept and setting out Coordinator’s reasons for that
view; and

\(c\) publish the independent person’s report and any report it prepared
under clause 2.16.13F(b) within 30 Business Days of receiving the
independent person’s report.

2.16.14. The Coordinator or the Economic Regulation Authority (as
applicable) may use any information collected under this section 2.16,
including information provided to it by AEMO, for the purpose of
carrying out any of its functions under the WEM Rules. The Coordinator
or the Economic Regulation Authority (as applicable) must treat
information collected under this section 2.16 as confidential and must
not publish any of that information other than in accordance with this
section 2.16 or where required in the performance of the Coordinator's
functions or the Economic Regulation Authority’s functions (as
applicable) under the WEM Rules. AEMO must use information provided to
it by the Coordinator or the Economic Regulation Authority under clause
2.16.6(c) only for the purpose of carrying out its functions under this
section 2.16. AEMO must treat information provided to it by the
Coordinator or the Economic Regulation Authority under clause 2.16.6(c)
as confidential and must not publish any of that information other than
in accordance with this section 2.16.

2.16.15. Where the Economic Regulation Authority provides a report to
the Minister in accordance with clause 2.16.11, it must, after
consultation with the Minister, publish a version of the report which
has confidential or sensitive data aggregated or removed. An assessment
of the results of the Economic Regulation Authority’s monitoring under
clause 2.16.9(b) must be included in the published version of the
report.

2.16.15A. Where the Coordinator provides a report to the Minister in
accordance with clause 2.16.13D, it must, after consultation with the
Minister, publish a version of the report which has confidential or
sensitive data aggregated or removed.

2.16.16. In respect of any reports published under this section 2.16,
only aggregate or summary statistics of confidential data may be
published. The aggregation must be at a level sufficient to ensure the
underlying data cannot be identified. Where aggregated data is derived
from confidential data collected from three or less Market Participants,
then this data should not be published.

Market Power Mitigation

2.16A. General Trading Obligations

2.16A.1. A Market Participant must offer prices in each of its STEM
Submissions and Real‑Time Market Submissions that reflect only the costs
that a Market Participant without market power would include in forming
profit-maximising price offers in a STEM Submission or Real-Time Market
Submission.

2.16A.2. The Economic Regulation Authority must not determine that a
Market Participant has engaged in conduct prohibited by clause 2.16A.1
unless the Economic Regulation Authority has first determined that the
Market Participant had market power at the time of offering the relevant
prices in its STEM Submission or Real‑Time Market Submission.

2.16A.3. A Market Participant must not engage in conduct in the STEM or
Real-Time Market that:

\(a\) is false, misleading or deceptive, or likely to mislead or
deceive;

\(b\) is fraudulent, dishonest or in bad faith; or

\(c\) has the purpose, or has or is likely to have the effect, of
distorting or manipulating prices in the Wholesale Electricity Market.

2.16A.4. In determining whether a Market Participant has engaged in
conduct prohibited by clause 2.16A.3, the Economic Regulation Authority
may take into account:

\(a\) historical STEM Submissions or Real-Time Market Submissions made
by the Market Participant with effect on or after the New WEM
Commencement Day, including changes to STEM Submissions and Real-Time
Market Submissions in which there is, or there appears to be, a pattern
of behaviour that may indicate such conduct was engaged in;

\(b\) the timeliness and accuracy of notification of Forced Outages by
the Market Participant;

\(c\) information regarding whether the Market Participant did not
comply with a Dispatch Instruction in respect of its Facility and the
reasons for the non-compliance; and

\(d\) any other information the Economic Regulation Authority considers
relevant to its determination.

2.16A.5. A STEM Submission or a Real-Time Market Submission is not made
in bad faith under clause 2.16A.3(b) if, at the time it is submitted,
the Market Participant had a genuine intention to honour the terms of
that STEM Submission or Real-Time Market Submission if the material
conditions and circumstances upon which the STEM Submission or Real-Time
Market Submission was based remained unchanged until the relevant
Trading Interval.

2.16A.6. A Market Participant may be taken to have made a STEM
Submission or a Real‑Time Market Submission in bad faith notwithstanding
that the intention of the Market Participant is ascertainable only by
inference from:

\(a\) the conduct of the Market Participant;

\(b\) the conduct of any other person; or

\(c\) the relevant circumstances.

2.16A.7. If a Market Participant does not have reasonable grounds for a
price, quantity, or Ramp Rate Limit, as applicable, it has included in a
Real-Time Market Submission at the time it submits that Real-Time Market
Submission, then the Market Participant is, for the purposes of clause
2.16A.3(a), taken to have known that the Real-Time Market Submission was
likely to lead to another Rule Participant being misled or deceived as
to the existence or non-existence of a material fact relating to the
Real‑Time Market.

2.16A.8. For the purposes of clause 2.16A.7, a Market Participant must
adduce evidence that it had reasonable grounds for including a price,
quantity or Ramp Rate Limit, as applicable, in the Real-Time Market
Submission. To avoid doubt, the effect of this clause is to place an
evidentiary burden on a Market Participant, and this clause does not
have the effect that, merely because such evidence is adduced, the
Market Participant who submitted the Real-Time Market Submission is
taken to have had reasonable grounds for including a price, quantity or
Ramp Rate Limit, as applicable.

2.16A.9. Clause 2.16A.7 does not imply that merely because a Market
Participant had reasonable grounds for making the representation or the
conduct referred to in Chapter 7, in respect of the Real-Time Market,
and in particular putting the price, quantity or Ramp Rate Limit, as
applicable, in a Real-Time Market Submission submitted by the Market
Participant, that such representation or conduct is not misleading.

2.16B. Portfolio Assessment

2.16B.1. The Economic Regulation Authority must, in accordance with the
WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.16D.15:

\(a\) by 1 April and 1 October each year, identify each Portfolio
operating in the Wholesale Electricity Market by applying the following
principles:

i\. each Scheduled Facility, Semi-Scheduled Facility and Non‑Scheduled
Facility must be allocated to one, but not more than one, Portfolio;

ii\. Registered Facilities which are owned by or registered to the same
Market Participant must be allocated to the same Portfolio;

iii\. Registered Facilities which are owned by or registered to Market
Participants that are associated entities (as that expression is defined
in the Corporations Act) must be allocated to the same Portfolio;

iv\. Registered Facilities which are registered to, or owned or
controlled by, a Market Participant or other entity, and Registered
Facilities that are registered to, or owned or controlled by, an
associated entity of that Market Participant or other entity (as those
expressions are defined in the Corporations Act) must be allocated to
the same Portfolio; and

v\. without limiting clause 2.16B.1(a)(i), a Registered Facility must
not be allocated to a Portfolio containing another Registered Facility
unless it is required by clauses 2.16B.1(a)(ii), 2.16B.1(a)(iii) or
2.16B.1(a)(iv); and

\(b\) within 10 Business Days of identifying each Portfolio under clause
2.16B.1(a), publish a list on its website specifying the name of each
Registered Facility within each identified Portfolio.

2.16B.2. Within 10 Business Days of the end of each Rolling Test Window,
the Economic Regulation Authority must, in accordance with the WEM
Procedure referred to in clause 2.16D.15, identify:

\(a\) each Constraint Equation for a Network Constraint that bound
during one or more Dispatch Intervals in the Rolling Test Window; and

\(b\) each Constrained Portfolio for each Constraint Equation identified
under clause 2.16B.2(a).

2.16B.3. The Economic Regulation Authority may, in carrying out its
obligations under clause 2.16B.2, specify a Registered Facility within
more than one Constrained Portfolio.

2.16C. Market Power Test

2.16C.1. The Economic Regulation Authority must, in accordance with the
WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.16D.15:

\(a\) within 10 Business Days of identifying each Portfolio p under
clause 2.16B.1(a), calculate Portfolio p’s percentage share of the total
maximum sent out capacity of all Registered Facilities assigned to a
Portfolio as follows:

$${\text{MSOC}\text{\\}\text{S}\text{h}\text{are}\text{(p)}}\_{\text{\\}}\text{=\\}\frac{\sum\_{\text{f}\text{∈}\text{p}}^{}{\text{MSOC}\left( \text{f} \right)}}{\sum\_{\text{f}\text{∈}\text{Facilities}}^{}{\text{MSOC}\left( \text{f} \right)}} \times \text{100}$$

where:

i\. MSOC(f) is the maximum sent out capacity specified for Registered
Facility f in Appendix 1(b)(v), Appendix 1(c)(v) or Appendix 1(d)(v) as
applicable;

ii\. f∈p denotes all Scheduled Facilities, Semi-Scheduled Facilities and
Non-Scheduled Facilities f assigned to Portfolio p; and

iii\. f∈Facilities denotes all Scheduled Facilities, Semi-Scheduled
Facilities and Non-Scheduled Facilities assigned to a Portfolio
identified under clause 2.16B.1(a);

\(b\) identify each Portfolio where the value determined under clause
2.16C.1(a) is equal to or greater than 10% ("**Material Portfolio**");
and

\(c\) within 10 Business Days of identifying each Material Portfolio
under clause 2.16C.1(b):

i\. publish the results of the calculations carried out under clause
2.16C.1(a) on its website; and

ii\. notify each Market Participant that has a Registered Facility
assigned to a Material Portfolio identified under clause 2.16C.1(b).

2.16C.1A. Each set of Material Portfolios identified by the Economic
Regulation Authority under clause 2.16C.1(b) replaces the previous set
of Material Portfolios identified by the Economic Regulation Authority
under clause 2.16C.1(b) (if any) with effect from the time that the
Economic Regulation Authority publishes the results of the relevant
calculations under clause 2.16C.1(c)(i).

2.16C.2. The Economic Regulation Authority must, not more than 20
Business Days following the end of a Rolling Test Window, in accordance
with the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.16D.15:

\(a\) calculate for that Rolling Test Window and for any relevant Fixed
Assessment Period, as a percentage, the Constrained Uplift Payment Ratio
for each Constrained Portfolio identified under clause 2.16B.2(b) as
follows:

$$\text{Constrained}\text{\\}\text{Uplift}\text{\\}\text{Payment}\text{\\}\text{Ratio}\text{\\}\text{=\\}\frac{\text{CP}\text{\\}\text{UP}}{\text{NC}} \times \text{100}$$

where:

i\. CP\_UP is the number of Dispatch Intervals in the Rolling Test
Window or Fixed Assessment Period (as applicable) in which:

1\. the Constraint Equation relevant to the identification of the
Constrained Portfolio identified under clause 2.16B.2(a) bound; and

2\. a Registered Facility in the Constrained Portfolio received an
Energy Uplift Payment; and

ii\. NC is the total number of Dispatch Intervals in the Rolling Test
Window or Fixed Assessment Period (as applicable) in which the
Constraint Equation relevant to the identification of the Constrained
Portfolio bound;

\(b\) identify each Constrained Portfolio with a Constrained Uplift
Payment Ratio equal to or greater than 10% as calculated under clause
2.16C.2(a) ("**Material Constrained Portfolio**");

\(c\) publish the results of the calculations carried out under clauses
2.16C.2(a) and 2.16C.2(b) on its website; and

\(d\) notify each Market Participant that has a Registered Facility
assigned to a Material Constrained Portfolio identified under clause
2.16.2C(b).

2.16C.2A. Each set of Material Constrained Portfolios identified by the
Economic Regulation Authority under clause 2.16C.2(b) replaces the
previous set of Material Constrained Portfolios identified by the
Economic Regulation Authority under clause 2.16C.2(b) (if any) with
effect from the time that the Economic Regulation Authority publishes
the results of the relevant calculations under 2.16C.2(c).

2.16C.3. By no later than three months from the date of receipt of a
notice from the Economic Regulation Authority under clause
2.16C.1(c)(ii) or clause 2.16C.2(d), a Market Participant must, in
accordance with the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.16D.15:

\(a\) maintain adequate records (that are capable of independent
verification) of the internal governance arrangements the Market
Participant has in place to comply with its obligations under clause
2.16A.1;

\(b\) maintain adequate records (that are capable of independent
verification) of the methods, assumptions and cost inputs the Market
Participant used to develop the prices in the Portfolio Supply Curve
offered in its STEM Submissions or Standing STEM Submissions, including,
for each relevant Facility; and

\(c\) maintain adequate records (that are capable of independent
verification) of the methods and cost inputs the Market Participant used
to develop the prices offered, quantities and Ramp Rate Limits in its
Real-Time Market Submissions or Standing Real-Time Market Submissions,
including, for each relevant Facility.

2.16C.4. The Economic Regulation Authority must monitor the following
price offers for compliance with clause 2.16A.1:

\(a\) the prices offered by a Market Participant which has one or more
Registered Facilities assigned to a Material Portfolio in its STEM
Portfolio Supply Curve; and

\(b\) the prices offered by a Market Participant in its Real-Time Market
Submissions for each of its Registered Facilities assigned to a Material
Portfolio or a Material Constrained Portfolio.

2.16C.5. A Market Participant must not make an Irregular Price Offer
that results in an inefficient market outcome.

2.16C.6. The Economic Regulation Authority must investigate potential
breaches of clause 2.16A.1:

\(a\) in accordance with clause 2.13.27 and the WEM Procedure referred
to in clause 2.16D.15; and

\(b\) having regard to the Offer Construction Guideline,

and if it considers that:

\(c\) a price offered by a Market Participant in its Portfolio Supply
Curve was inconsistent with the price that a Market Participant without
market power would offer in a profit-maximising Portfolio Supply Curve;
or

\(d\) a price offered by a Market Participant in its Real-Time Market
Submissions was inconsistent with the price that a Market Participant
without market power would offer in a profit-maximising Real-Time
Market,

the Economic Regulation Authority must determine that the price was an
Irregular Price Offer.

2.16C.7. The Economic Regulation Authority must investigate and
determine, in accordance with clause 2.13.27 and the WEM Procedure
referred to in clause 2.16D.15, whether an Irregular Price Offer
determined under clause 2.16C.6 has resulted in an inefficient market
outcome.

2.16C.8. Without limiting clauses 2.16C.6 and 2.16C.7, the Economic
Regulation Authority must make a determination under clause 2.16C.6 and,
if necessary, under clause 2.16C.7, no later than six months from the
day the Economic Regulation Authority commenced its investigation under
clause 2.16C.6.

2.16C.9. In conducting an investigation under clause 2.16C.7, the
Economic Regulation Authority:

\(a\) must consider any changes to:

i\. a STEM Clearing Price or Reference Trading Price;

ii\. Energy Uplift Payments; or

iii\. the quantities of energy scheduled in respect of Market
Participants in the STEM Auction, or the dispatch of Facilities in the
Real-Time Market,

that are likely to have occurred as a result of the Irregular Price
Offer; and

\(b\) may consider any other matters it considers relevant.

2.16C.10. If, following an investigation, the Economic Regulation
Authority has determined pursuant to clause 2.16C.6 and clause 2.16C.7
that a Market Participant has breached the obligation specified in
clause 2.16C.5, the Economic Regulation Authority must:

\(a\) at least two Business Days prior to publication of its
determination under clause 2.16C.10(b), notify the relevant Market
Participant of the determination; and

\(b\) publish on its website details of its determination, including the
name of the relevant Market Participant and the Irregular Price Offer to
which the determination relates.

2.16C.11. For the avoidance of doubt, the Economic Regulation Authority
may investigate any alleged breach of clause 2.16A.1, even if the
Economic Regulation Authority was not monitoring the Market
Participant’s price offers under clause 2.16C.4 at the time the alleged
breach occurred.

2.16D. Guidance, WEM Procedures and Consultation Framework

2.16D.1. The Economic Regulation Authority must develop, maintain and
publish on its website, the following guidelines:

\(a\) an Offer Construction Guideline that:

i\. provides guidance to Market Participants in relation to the price
offer obligations under clause 2.16A.1;

ii\. details how the Economic Regulation Authority will assess prices
offered under clause 2.16C.6;

iii\. permits the recovery of all efficient variable costs of producing
the relevant electricity, including all costs incurred under long-term
take-or-pay fuel contracts;

iv\. outlines how the Economic Regulation Authority will consider price
offers for different Facility types, including Electric Storage
Resources;

v\. provides examples illustrating the types of conduct that the
Economic Regulation Authority considers would be likely to contravene
the price offer obligations under clause 2.16A.1; and

vi\. provides guidance to Market Participants on how the Economic
Regulation Authority will assess inefficient market outcomes under
clause 2.16C.7; and

\(b\) a Trading Conduct Guideline that must provide clarity and guidance
to Market Participants regarding the prohibited conduct described in
clause 2.16A.3. The Trading Conduct Guideline must provide examples
illustrating the types of conduct that the Economic Regulation Authority
considers would be likely to contravene clause 2.16A.3.

2.16D.2. Subject to the provisions of this section 2.16D, the Economic
Regulation Authority may amend the guidelines to be developed and
maintained under clause 2.16D.1 at any time.

2.16D.3. In developing and maintaining the guidelines under clause
2.16D.1, or any amendments to them under clause 2.16D.2, the Economic
Regulation Authority must publish on its website:

\(a\) a draft report containing a copy of the proposed guidelines, or
the proposed amendments to the guidelines, as applicable, and a request
for submissions;

\(b\) the closing date for submissions, which must be no earlier than
four weeks after the date of publication of the draft report; and

\(c\) a copy of all submissions received provided that if a submission
contains information that the Economic Regulation Authority reasonably
considers to be confidential, the Economic Regulation Authority may
redact that information to the extent it considers appropriate.

2.16D.4. Following the closing date for submissions on the draft report
published under clause 2.16D.3, the Economic Regulation Authority must
publish a final report on its website containing:

\(a\) the final guidelines, or the amendments to the guidelines, as
applicable;

\(b\) where applicable, the reasons for the amendment to the guidelines;

\(c\) a summary of any submissions received by the Economic Regulation
Authority on the draft report published under clause 2.16D.3 that were
received within the time specified, and any late submissions the
Economic Regulation Authority has decided, in its discretion, to take
into account;

\(d\) the Economic Regulation Authority’s responses to the issues raised
in those submissions;

\(e\) any other matters the Economic Regulation Authority considers
relevant to the guidelines, or the amendment to the guidelines, as
applicable; and

\(f\) the date that the final guidelines, or the amendment to the
guidelines, will commence.

2.16D.5. A Market Participant that has received a notice from the
Economic Regulation Authority under clauses 2.16C.1(c)(ii) or 2.16C.2(d)
may, in accordance with clause 2.16D.6, request guidance from the
Economic Regulation Authority in relation to the Offer Construction
Guideline, including, for the purposes of the Economic Regulation
Authority's assessment of prices offered under clause 2.16C.6, how the
matters in the Offer Construction Guideline may apply to the Market
Participant's Registered Facility.

2.16D.6. A request made by a Market Participant under clause 2.16D.5
must:

\(a\) be in writing;

\(b\) identify the matters in the Offer Construction Guideline on which
the Market Participant is seeking guidance;

\(c\) specify the Market Participant's reasons for seeking guidance;

\(d\) where relevant, provide supporting materials that illustrate or
evidence the matters raised in the request; and

\(e\) include any other information specified in the WEM Procedure
referred to in clause 2.16D.15.

2.16D.7. Within 20 Business Days of receipt of a request under clause
2.16D.5, the Economic Regulation Authority must:

\(a\) consider the request; and

\(b\) subject to clause 2.16D.10, use reasonable endeavours to provide
guidance on the matters specified in the request.

2.16D.8. The Economic Regulation Authority may request further
information from a Market Participant that has made a request under
clause 2.16D.5. If, within 15 Business Days of the date of the Economic
Regulation Authority's request for further information, the Market
Participant does not provide the information requested, or the Economic
Regulation Authority reasonably considers the information provided is
not satisfactory, the Market Participant will be deemed to have
withdrawn the relevant request.

2.16D.9. If the Economic Regulation Authority issues a request for
further information under clause 2.16D.8, the timeframe specified in
clause 2.16D.7 for the Economic Regulation Authority to provide the
relevant guidance will recommence from the date the Market Participant
has provided all of the further information requested by the Economic
Regulation Authority.

2.16D.10. The Economic Regulation Authority is not required to provide
guidance to a Market Participant in relation to a request under clause
2.16D.5 where it considers that:

\(a\) the Offer Construction Guideline already provides sufficient
guidance on the matters raised in the request;

\(b\) the request does not meet the requirements in clause 2.16D.6;

\(c\) the cost the Economic Regulation Authority would incur to provide
the guidance sought in the request is unreasonable or excessive; or

\(d\) the request is substantially similar to a previous request
considered by the Economic Regulation Authority from the same Market
Participant.

2.16D.11. Subject to clause 2.16D.12, any guidance provided by the
Economic Regulation Authority pursuant to clause 2.16D.7 is not binding
on the Economic Regulation Authority, the Market Participant who made
the request, or any other person, and the Economic Regulation Authority
may, at any time, reconsider, revise or withdraw any guidance provided
to a Market Participant.

2.16D.12. In conducting an investigation under clauses 2.16C.6 or
2.16C.7, the Economic Regulation Authority must take into account any
guidance it may have provided to the Market Participant under clause
2.16D.7 that is relevant to the matters being investigated.

2.16D.13. Where the Economic Regulation Authority provides guidance to a
Market Participant under clause 2.16D.7, the Economic Regulation
Authority must consider whether the Offer Construction Guideline should
be amended to reflect that guidance. Where the Economic Regulation
Authority considers the Offer Construction Guideline should be amended,
the Economic Regulation Authority must initiate an amendment to the
Offer Construction Guideline in accordance with clause 2.16D.3 as soon
as practicable.

2.16D.14. The Economic Regulation Authority must publish on its website
a copy of any guidance provided to a Market Participant under clause
2.16D.7 provided that the Economic Regulation Authority must first
redact all information that is confidential or commercially sensitive in
the guidance, including the name of the Market Participant to whom the
guidance was provided. Where the Economic Regulation Authority considers
the guidance cannot be redacted to ensure the identity of the Market
Participant to whom the guidance was provided remains confidential, the
Economic Regulation Authority is not required to publish the guidance.

2.16D.15. The Economic Regulation Authority must document in a WEM
Procedure:

\(a\) the methodologies and processes to be followed by the Economic
Regulation Authority in relation to:

i\. identifying each Portfolio and Constrained Portfolio operating in
the Wholesale Electricity Market pursuant to clauses 2.16B.1(a) and
2.16B.2, respectively;

ii\. carrying out the calculations under clauses 2.16C.1(a) and
2.16C.2(a) in relation to identifying each Material Portfolio and
Material Constrained Portfolio, respectively; and

iii\. monitoring prices offered by a Market Participant under clause
2.16C.4, and making determinations under clauses 2.16C.6 and 2.16C.7 in
relation to those price offers;

\(b\) the types and format of the information, and level of detail
required to be maintained or recorded by a Market Participant to enable
the Economic Regulation Authority to carry out its monitoring of price
offers under clause 2.16C.4; and

\(c\) details of the processes the Economic Regulation Authority and
Market Participants must follow in respect to a request for guidance
under clause 2.16D.5, which may include a template that a Market
Participant must use for making a request.

2.16E. Irregular Price Offers – Limited Application of Section 2.13

2.16E.1. Subject to clauses 2.16C.6 and 2.16C.7, the Economic Regulation
Authority must not, in respect of a price offer described in clause
2.16C.4, investigate a Market Participant under clause 2.13.27, or take
enforcement action under clause 2.13.36 for a breach of clause 2.16A.1,
where the Economic Regulation Authority has determined under clause
2.16C.7 that an Irregular Price Offer by the Market Participant has not
resulted in an inefficient market outcome.

2.16E.2. Where the Economic Regulation Authority has determined that an
Irregular Price Offer by a Market Participant has not resulted in an
inefficient market outcome, the Economic Regulation Authority must
notify the Market Participant of the results of the investigation and
the reasons for its decision.

Reviewable Decisions and Disputes

2.17. Reviewable Decisions

2.17.1. A Rule Participant whose interests are adversely affected by a
Reviewable Decision or a decision subject to Procedural Review, may
apply to the Electricity Review Board for a review of that decision in
accordance with the WEM Regulations.

2.17.2. Decisions by AEMO, the Economic Regulation Authority, the
Coordinator or a Network Operator, as applicable, made under the
following clauses may be subject to a Procedural Review:

\(a\) clauses 2.5.6(c), 2.5.9, 2.6.3A(a) and 2.7.7A(a); and

\(b\) clauses 2.10.2A(a) and 2.10.13.

2.17.3. In accordance with the WEM Regulations, a Rule Participant may
apply to the Electricity Review Board for a review of Reviewable
Decisions or a decision made under clauses subject to Procedural Review.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>In order not to unnecessarily delay processes or introduce a decision
maker other than AEMO and the relevant Network Operator in respect of
generator performance standards, certain parts of Chapter 3A will not be
subject to the general ability to raise a dispute under the WEM Rules.
These are:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>a decision to exempt generating works connected to a transmission
system;</p></li>
<li><p>a decision to refuse to renegotiate a Registered Generator
Performance Standard;</p></li>
<li><p>a decision in respect of a Rectification Plan; and</p></li>
<li><p>a decision to declare a Potential Relevant Generation
Modification to be a Relevant Generator Modification.</p></li>
</ul>
<p>Clause 2.18.1 is amended to remove the dispute resolution mechanism
in section 1.42 for Existing Transmission Connected Market Generators
from the dispute process so that the dispute resolution mechanism in
section 1.42 is the only mechanism to resolve such disputes (other than
any rights a party has under law). Decisions by AEMO as to extensions to
submit a Generator Monitoring Plan under clause 1.41.4 will also be
exempt from the disputes regime.</p>
<p>Clause 2.18.1 is further amended to exclude disputes about Market
Information, which are dealt with under section 10.5.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.18. Disputes

2.18.1. The dispute process set out in sections 2.18, 2.19 and 2.20
applies to any dispute concerning:

\(a\) the application or interpretation of these WEM Rules;

\(b\) the failure of Rule Participants to reach agreement on a matter
where these WEM Rules require agreement or require the Rule Participants
to negotiate in good faith with a view to reaching agreement; or

\(c\) payment of moneys under, or the performance of any obligation
under, these WEM Rules,

but does not apply to:

\(d\) any matter that is identified as a Reviewable Decision or is
subject to Procedural Review;

\(e\) a matter that arises under a contract between Rule Participants,
unless AEMO is a party to the contract and the contract provides that
the dispute process applies;

\(f\) a dispute that arises in relation to:

i\. a decision to exempt or not to exempt a Transmission Connected
Generating System under section 3A.3;

ii\. a decision by the Network Operator to refuse to renegotiate a
Registered Generator Performance Standard under clause 3A.8.8;

iii\. a decision in respect of a Rectification Plan under section 3A.11;
or

iv\. a decision to declare a Potential Relevant Generation Modification
to be a Relevant Generation Modification under section 3A.13;

\(g\) a dispute in respect of a decision by a Network Operator to grant
or refuse an extension of time for a Market Participant responsible for
an Existing Transmission Connected Generating System to have a
Registered Generator Performance Standard for each Technical Requirement
for the Existing Transmission Connected Generating System;

\(h\) a dispute in respect of a decision by AEMO to grant or refuse an
extension of time for a Market Participant responsible for an Existing
Transmission Connected Generating System to:

i\. submit a proposed Generator Monitoring Plan; or

ii\. have a Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO;

\(i\) a dispute which is being dealt with under the dispute resolution
mechanism for Existing Transmission Connected Generating Systems
contained in section 1.42; or

\(j\) disputes about the classification, release or disclosure of Market
Information arising under Chapter 10.

2.18.2. For the purposes of these WEM Rules, the “Dispute Participants”
are the Rule Participants raising the dispute, AEMO and all Rule
Participants named in a Notice of Dispute or joined to the dispute in
accordance with clause 2.19.5.

2.18.3. At any time during the course of resolving a dispute a Dispute
Participant may refer a question of law to a court of competent
jurisdiction.

2.18.4. Dispute Participants must not agree to actions to be taken in
resolution of a dispute that are inconsistent with the WEM Rules.

2.19. First Stage Dispute Resolution

2.19.1. Where a Rule Participant wishes to raise a dispute with another
Rule Participant concerning a matter to which this dispute process
applies, it may issue a Notice of Dispute to each other Rule Participant
that is a party to the dispute within 12 months of the matter giving
rise to the dispute.

2.19.2. The Rule Participant raising the dispute may name any Rule
Participant in a Notice of Dispute that the Rule Participant raising the
dispute considers may be affected by the dispute or resolution of the
dispute.

2.19.3. The Notice of Dispute must be in writing and must contain:

\(a\) the date on which the Notice of Dispute was issued;

\(b\) the identity of the Rule Participant issuing the Notice of
Dispute;

\(c\) the identities of the other Rule Participants party to the
dispute;

\(d\) the details of the dispute, including a description of the
disputed actions, and the time and date when the disputed actions
occurred; and

\(e\) the contact person for the Rule Participant issuing the dispute,
and their mailing address.

2.19.4. A Rule Participant receiving a Notice of Dispute under clause
2.19.1 must supply a confirmation of the receipt of the Notice of
Dispute within two Business Days of receipt of the Notice of Dispute,
including details of a contact person and their mailing address.

2.19.5. Where AEMO receives a Notice of Dispute and it considers that a
Rule Participant not named in the Notice of Dispute may be affected by
the dispute or resolution of the dispute, it may, within 10 Business
Days of receiving the Notice of Dispute, join the Rule Participant to
the dispute by notifying the Rule Participant of the dispute and
providing a copy of the Notice of Dispute.

2.19.6. The Chief Executive Officers, or their designated
representatives with authority to resolve the dispute, from all Dispute
Participants must make reasonable endeavours to meet on one or more
occasions, and to attempt in good faith and using their best endeavours
at all times to resolve the dispute.

2.19.7. A dispute must be escalated to the second stage dispute
resolution process in section 2.20 if the Dispute Participants have not
resolved the dispute (as evidenced by the terms of the settlement being
reduced to writing and signed by each Chief Executive Officer) within:

\(a\) a time period agreed by all Dispute Participants; or

\(b\) if no time period is agreed by all Dispute Participants, within 60
days of the date on which the Notice of Dispute was issued.

2.20. Second Stage Dispute Resolution

2.20.1. Where any Dispute is not resolved as provided for in section
2.19 then the Dispute Participants must give consideration to resolving
the dispute through mediation, conciliation, arbitration or alternative
dispute resolution methods, using an independent body agreed between the
Dispute Participants.

2.20.2. If any Dispute is not resolved as provided for in section 2.19
and a Dispute Participant has given consideration to resolving the
dispute in accordance with clause 2.20.1, then that Dispute Participant
may commence proceedings before a court of competent jurisdiction in
relation to the dispute.

Market Consultation

2.21. Market Consultation

2.21.1. The Economic Regulation Authority must consult on such matters
with such persons and over such timeframes as are specified in these WEM
Rules.

2.21.2. The Economic Regulation Authority must:

\(a\) conduct its consultation processes in good faith; and

\(b\) ensure that these consultation processes allow a reasonable
opportunity for relevant stakeholders to present their views.

2.21.3. \[Blank\]

2.21.4. \[Blank\]

2.21.5. AEMO must consult on such matters with such persons and over
such timeframes as are specified in these WEM Rules.

2.21.6. AEMO must—

\(a\) conduct its consultation processes in good faith; and

\(b\) ensure that these consultation processes allow a reasonable
opportunity for relevant stakeholders to present their views.

2.21.7. \[Blank\]

2.21.8. \[Blank\]

2.21.9. Each Network Operator must consult on such matters with such
persons and over such timeframes as are specified in these WEM Rules.

2.21.10. Each Network Operator must:

\(a\) conduct its consultation processes in good faith; and

\(b\) ensure that these consultation processes allow a reasonable
opportunity for relevant stakeholders to present their views.

2.21.11. The Coordinator must consult on such matters with such persons
and over such timeframes as are specified in these WEM Rules.

2.21.12. The Coordinator must:

\(a\) conduct its consultation processes in good faith; and

\(b\) ensure that these consultation processes allow a reasonable
opportunity for relevant stakeholders to present their views.

Budgets and Fees

2.22. \[Blank\]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 2.22A. is amended to address the shortcomings with the
current rules relating to the determination of AEMO’s budget. This
includes replacing transitional rules with the specific function to
facilitate and prepare for Market Evolution.</p>
<p>The current rules are restrictive for the Regulator (limited
discretion in determining if individual projects are prudent, limited
review and information gathering time/powers). This has resulted in
poorly evidenced submissions with the onus on the ERA to determine
efficient funding levels.</p>
<p>The amendments will seek to achieve the following:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>enable regulatory scrutiny and enhance transparency by:</p></li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li><p>identifying projects/functions and related costs up front;
and</p></li>
<li><p>increasing transparency over funding allocation and actual
expenditures;</p></li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li><p>deal with uncertainty by allowing partial approvals and limited
in-period reopening; and</p></li>
<li><p>promote greater regulatory certainty through guidelines to be
issued and published by the ERA including:</p></li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li><p>procedure guidelines; and</p></li>
<li><p>submission and reporting guidelines.</p></li>
</ul></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.22A. Determination of AEMO's budget

2.22A.1. Subject to the requirements of this section 2.22A, AEMO may
recover its costs for performing its functions under the WEM Regulations
and the WEM Rules.

2.22A.2. For the Review Period, AEMO must seek the determination of its
Allowable Revenue and Forecast Capital Expenditure from the Economic
Regulation Authority for its functions, in accordance with the proposal
guideline referred to in clause 2.22A.9.

2.22A.2A. A submission by AEMO under clause 2.22A.2 must be made and
processed in accordance with the following timelines:

\(a\) by 31 October of the year prior to the start of the Review Period,
AEMO must submit a proposal for its Allowable Revenue and Forecast
Capital Expenditure over the Review Period to the Economic Regulation
Authority;

\(b\) by 31 March of the year in which the Review Period commences, the
Economic Regulation Authority must publish on its website a draft
determination of AEMO’s Allowable Revenue and Forecast Capital
Expenditure for the Review Period for public consultation;

\(c\) by 30 April of the year in which the Review Period commences, the
Economic Regulation Authority must prepare and publish on its website
its final determination of AEMO’s Allowable Revenue and Forecast Capital
Expenditure for the Review Period together with any submission received
in response to the draft determination published in accordance with
clause 2.22A.2A(b); and

\(d\) where the Economic Regulation Authority does not make a
determination by the date in clause 2.22A.2A(c) or clause 2.22A.2B(c),
the Market Participant Market Fee rate determined in accordance with
section 2.24 for the current Financial Year will continue to apply until
the Economic Regulation Authority makes a determination.

2.22A.2B. Notwithstanding clause 2.22A.2A, for the Review Period from 1
July 2022 to 1 July 2025 the following applies:

\(a\) the Economic Regulation Authority must publish a proposal
guideline by 31 October 2021;

\(b\) AEMO must submit a proposal for its Allowable Revenue and Forecast
Capital Expenditure to the Economic Regulation Authority for the Review
Period by 31 December 2021;

\(c\) the Economic Regulation Authority must publish on its website a
draft determination of AEMO’s Allowable Revenue and Forecast Capital
Expenditure for the Review Period for public consultation by 31 March
2022; and

\(d\) the Economic Regulation Authority must prepare and publish on its
website its final determination of AEMO’s Allowable Revenue and Forecast
Capital Expenditure for the Review Period by 31 May 2022.

2.22A.3. AEMO’s proposal under clauses 2.22A.2A(a) or 2.22A.2B(b) or
AEMO’s application for reassessment under clauses 2.22A.12 or 2.22A.13
must, to the extent practicable, identify proposed costs that are
associated with a specific project or where that is not practicable, one
or more specific functions.

2.22A.4. If AEMO appoints a Delegate, then its proposal for, or
application for reassessment of, its Allowable Revenue and Forecast
Capital Expenditure must separately itemise the amount payable to the
Delegate.

2.22A.5. The Economic Regulation Authority must take the following into
account when determining AEMO's Allowable Revenue and Forecast Capital
Expenditure or an application for reassessment to the Allowable Revenue
or Forecast Capital Expenditure:

\(a\) the Allowable Revenue must be sufficient to cover the forward
looking costs of performing AEMO’s functions in accordance with the
following principles:

i\. recurring expenditure requirements and payments are recovered in the
year of the expenditure; and

ii\. capital expenditure is to be recovered through the depreciation and
amortisation of the assets acquired by the capital expenditures in a
manner that is consistent with generally accepted accounting principles;

\(b\) the Allowable Revenue and Forecast Capital Expenditure must
include only costs which would be incurred by a prudent provider of the
services provided by AEMO in performing its functions, acting
efficiently, to achieve the lowest practicably sustainable cost of
performing AEMO’s functions, while effectively promoting the Wholesale
Market Objectives;

\(c\) where possible, the Economic Regulation Authority should benchmark
the Allowable Revenue and Forecast Capital Expenditure against the costs
of providing similar functions and/or projects in other jurisdictions;

\(d\) where costs incurred by AEMO relate to both the performance of
functions in connection with the WEM Rules, and the performance of
AEMO's other functions, the costs must be allocated on a fair and
reasonable basis between:

i\. costs recoverable as part of AEMO's Allowable Revenue and Forecast
Capital Expenditure; and

ii\. other costs not to be recovered under the WEM Rules; and

\(e\) any other matters the Economic Regulation Authority considers
relevant to its determination.

2.22A.6. The Economic Regulation Authority may do any or all of the
following in respect to AEMO’s proposal under clauses 2.22A.2A(a) or
2.22A.2B(b):

\(a\) approve the costs of any project;

\(b\) approve the costs of AEMO performing its functions;

\(c\) if the Economic Regulation Authority considers that some costs do
not meet the requirements of clause 2.22A.5, reject the costs fully or
partially, or substitute those costs with costs the Economic Regulation
Authority considers meets the requirements of clause 2.22A.5; and

\(d\) recommend to AEMO that some of the costs be considered in a
subsequent Review Period or in accordance with clause 2.22A.14.

2.22A.7. By 30 June each year, AEMO must publish on the WEM Website a
budget for the costs AEMO will incur in performing its functions for the
coming Financial Year (including, without limitation, the amount to be
paid to a Delegate). AEMO must ensure that its budget is:

\(a\) consistent with the Allowable Revenue and Forecast Capital
Expenditure determined by the Economic Regulation Authority for the
relevant Review Period and any reassessment; and

\(b\) reported in accordance with the Regulatory Reporting Guidelines
issued by the Economic Regulation Authority from time to time in
accordance with clause 2.22A.9.

2.22A.8. By 31 October each year, AEMO must publish on the WEM Website a
financial report showing AEMO's actual financial performance against its
budget for the previous Financial Year (including, without limitation,
the actual amount paid to a Delegate compared to the budgeted amount).
The report must be in accordance with the Regulatory Reporting
Guidelines issued by the Economic Regulation Authority from time to time
in accordance with clause 2.22A.9.

2.22A.9. The Economic Regulation Authority must issue guidelines,
following public consultation, in relation to this section 2.22A,
including:

\(a\) proposal guidelines, which must consider how future projects that
carry a risk of not proceeding or for which the associated costs are not
able to be quantified may be dealt with, and provide clarity and
guidance to AEMO and Market Participants regarding the level of detail
about projects, functions and costs expected in AEMO’s proposal; and

\(b\) regulatory reporting guidelines, which:

i\. must contain annual reporting obligations and provide clarity and
guidance to AEMO and Market Participants about the scope of reporting
and how AEMO should annually report to the Economic Regulation Authority
and Market Participants; and

ii\. are aimed at providing transparency and accountability in relation
to AEMO’s functions and Allowable Revenue and Forecast Capital
Expenditure.

2.22A.10. The Economic Regulation Authority may amend guidelines issued
under clause 2.22A.9 at any time, following public consultation which
allows a reasonable opportunity for relevant stakeholders to present
their views.

2.22A.11. Where the revenue earned for the functions performed by AEMO
via Market Fees in the previous Financial Year, is greater than or less
than AEMO's expenditure for that Financial Year, AEMO’s current year’s
budget must take into account any difference between AEMO’s Market Fees
revenue and AEMO’s expenditure in the previous Financial Year by:

\(a\) decreasing the budgeted revenue by the amount of any revenue
surplus; or

\(b\) increasing the budgeted revenue by the amount of any revenue
shortfall.

2.22A.12. Where, taking into account any adjustment under clause
2.22A.11, AEMO’s budget is likely to result in revenue recovery, over
the relevant Review Period, being at least the lower of 10% of the
Allowable Revenue or $10 million, greater than the Allowable Revenue
determined by the Economic Regulation Authority, AEMO must apply to the
Economic Regulation Authority to reassess the Allowable Revenue.

2.22A.13. AEMO must apply to the Economic Regulation Authority to
determine the adjusted Forecast Capital Expenditure for the current
Review Period if the capital expenditure, over the relevant Review
Period, is likely to be at least the lower of 10% of the Forecast
Capital Expenditure or $10 million, greater than the Forecast Capital
Expenditure determined by the Economic Regulation Authority.

2.22A.13A.If AEMO underspends on the Allowable Revenue and/or Forecast
Capital Expenditure determined by the Economic Regulation Authority in a
Review Period, then, for the next Review Period, the $10 million
threshold in clause 2.22A.13 is to be increased to the amount equal to
30 percent of the underspend plus $10 million.

2.22A.14. AEMO may apply to the Economic Regulation Authority, at any
time during a Review Period, for additional costs to be considered by
the Economic Regulation Authority as part of the Allowable Revenue and
Forecast Capital Expenditure for that Review Period:

\(a\) for the Allowable Revenue:

i\. costs previously rejected by the Economic Regulation Authority
pursuant to clause 2.22A.6;

ii\. new costs for new projects or new functions conferred on AEMO since
AEMO’s proposal for its Allowable Revenue for the current Review Period
was submitted; and

iii\. costs which were not able to be estimated with reasonable
confidence at the time the Allowable Revenue for the current Review
Period was submitted; and

\(b\) for the Forecast Capital Expenditure:

i\. costs previously rejected by the Economic Regulation Authority
pursuant to clause 2.22A.5;

ii\. new costs for new projects or new functions conferred on AEMO since
AEMO’s proposal for its Forecast Capital Expenditure for the current
Review Period was submitted; and

iii\. costs which were not able to be estimated with reasonable
confidence at the time of the Forecast Capital Expenditure for the
current Review Period was submitted.

2.22A.15. The Economic Regulation Authority may request information from
AEMO in relation to the performance of its functions under this section
2.22A. AEMO must provide the information to the Economic Regulation
Authority by the time specified in a request, which must be reasonable.

2.22A.16. AEMO must make an application under clauses 2.22A.12 or
2.22A.14(a) by 31 March for the Economic Regulation Authority to make a
determination before the commencement of the Financial Year to which it
relates.

2.22A.17. The Economic Regulation Authority may amend a determination
under clauses 2.22A.2A(c) or 2.22A.2B(d) if AEMO makes a reassessment
application under clauses 2.22A.12, 2.22A.13 or 2.22A.14 and the
Economic Regulation Authority:

\(a\) must take the matters referred to in clause 2.22A.5 into account
in determining any reassessment;

\(b\) may consider as part of its amended determination any earlier
determined costs where the Economic Regulation Authority reasonably
considers it necessary to review those earlier determined costs as part
of the reassessment;

\(c\) is not required to reassess earlier determined costs in making its
redetermination of the Allowable Revenue or Forecast Capital
Expenditure; and

\(d\) must complete such public consultation as the Economic Regulation
Authority considers appropriate in the circumstances.

2.23. \[Blank\]

2.24. Determination of Market Fees

2.24.1. The Market Fees charged by AEMO are:

\(a\) Market Participant Market Fees, Market Participant Coordinator
Fees and Market Participant Regulator Fees the rates of which are
determined in accordance with this section 2.24;

\(b\) Application Fees in accordance with section 2.33 and clauses
2.31.2, 4.9.3(c), 4.26.2CC and 4.28.9B; and

\(c\) a Reassessment Fee in accordance with clause 4.11.11.

2.24.2. Before 30 June each year, AEMO must determine and publish the
level of:

\(a\) the Market Participant Market Fee rate;

\(b\) the Market Participant Coordinator Fee rate;

\(c\) the Market Participant Regulator Fee rate;

\(d\) each Application Fee; and

\(e\) the Reassessment Fee,

to apply over the year starting 1 July in accordance with:

\(f\) AEMO’s budget published under clause 2.22A.7;

\(g\) information provided by the Economic Regulation Authority to AEMO
under clause 2.24.6 (if any); and

\(h\) information provided by the Coordinator to AEMO under clause
2.24.6A (if any).

Where the Economic Regulation Authority has not provided AEMO with the
information under, and by the time specified in clause 2.24.6, AEMO must
determine and publish the expected level of Market Participant Regulator
Fee rate based on the most recent information provided to AEMO by the
Economic Regulation Authority under clause 2.24.6. Where the Coordinator
has not provided AEMO with the information under, and by the time
specified in, clause 2.24.6A, AEMO must determine and publish the
expected level of Market Participant Coordinator Fee rate based on the
most recent information provided to AEMO by the Coordinator under clause
2.24.6A.

2.24.2A. AEMO must determine and publish a level of revised Market
Participant Coordinator Fee rate or Market Participant Regulator Fee
rate (as applicable), within five Business Days of:

\(a\) receiving the information under clause 2.24.6A from the
Coordinator after the timeframe specified in that clause; or

\(b\) receiving the information under clause 2.24.6 from the Economic
Regulation Authority after the timeframe specified in that clause.

2.24.2B. A revised Market Participant Coordinator Fee rate and Market
Participant Regulator Fee rate will supersede any expected Market
Participant Coordinator Fee rate and Market Participant Regulator Fee
rate and are recoverable from Market Participants in arrears with effect
from the start of the Financial Year to which they apply.

2.24.3. At the same time as AEMO publishes a level of revised Market
Participant Market Fee rate, Market Participant Coordinator Fee rate or
Market Participant Regulator Fee rate (as applicable), AEMO must also
publish an estimate of the total amount of revenue to be earned from:

\(a\) Market Participant Market Fees collected for AEMO's:

i\. market operation services;

ii\. system planning services;

iii\. market administration services; and

iv\. system management services,

where the amounts to be earned for each service is equal to the relevant
costs in AEMO’s budget published in accordance with clause 2.22A.7 or as
adjusted under clause 2.24.2A;

\(b\) Market Participant Coordinator Fees collected for:

i\. the Coordinator's functions under these WEM Rules;

ii\. the costs associated with the remuneration and other expenses for
the independent Chair of the Market Advisory Committee; and

iii\. in the Coordinator’s discretion, costs associated with the
remuneration and other expenses of the representatives of small-use
consumers on the Market Advisory Committee,

where the amount to be earned for those services is equivalent to the
costs identified by the Coordinator as costs incurred in the performance
of the Coordinator's functions under these WEM Rules or the WEM
Regulations, where the amount must be consistent with the relevant
amount notified to AEMO in accordance with clause 2.24.6A; and

\(c\) Market Participant Regulator Fees collected for the Economic
Regulation Authority’s monitoring, compliance, enforcement and
regulation services where the amount must be consistent with the
relevant amount notified to AEMO in accordance with clause 2.24.6.

2.24.4. The Market Participant Market Fee rate, Market Participant
Coordinator Fee rate and Market Participant Regulator Fee rate should be
set at a level that AEMO estimates will earn revenue equal to the
relevant estimate of revenue under clause 2.24.3.

2.24.5. The Economic Regulation Authority may recover a portion of its
budget determined by the Minister responsible for the Economic
Regulation Authority which corresponds to the costs of the Economic
Regulation Authority in undertaking its Wholesale Electricity Market
related functions and other functions under these WEM Rules and the WEM
Regulations from the collection of Market Participant Regulator Fees
under these WEM Rules. The Economic Regulation Authority must identify
in its budget the proportion of its costs that relate to the performance
of its Wholesale Electricity Market related functions and its other
functions.

2.24.5A. Where the revenue earned via Market Participant Regulator Fees
in the previous Financial Year is greater than or less than the Economic
Regulation Authority expenditure related to the functions described in
clause 2.24.5 for that Financial Year, the current year’s budget must
take this into account by decreasing the budgeted revenue by the amount
of the surplus or adding to the budgeted revenue the amount of any
shortfall, as the case may be.

2.24.5B. The Coordinator may recover a portion of her or his budget
determined by the Minister responsible for the Coordinator which
corresponds to the costs of the Coordinator in undertaking her or his
functions under these WEM Rules (including costs referred to in clause
2.24.3(b)) from the collection of Market Participant Coordinator Fees
under these WEM Rules.

2.24.5C. The Coordinator must:

\(a\) identify in her or his budget the proportion of her or his costs
that relate to the performance of her or his functions under these WEM
Rules; and

\(b\) subject to clause 2.24.5E, publish on the Coordinator’s Website
the proportion of costs corresponding to the functions described in
clause 2.2D.1.

2.24.5D. Where the revenue earned via Market Participant Coordinator
Fees in the previous Financial Year is greater than or less than the
Coordinator expenditure related to the functions described in clause
2.24.5B for that Financial Year, the current year’s budget must take
this into account by decreasing the budgeted revenue by the amount of
the surplus or adding to the budgeted revenue the amount of any
shortfall, as the case may be.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>In practice, it is problematic to separate out the Coordinator's
costs relating to its functions under clause 2.2D.1(j) (undertake
reviews and consultation as required under these WEM Rules) from its
costs relating to the functions listed in clause 2.24.5E(b) (e.g. the
functions under clauses 2.2D.1(g) (develop amendments to these WEM Rules
and replacements for them) and 2.2D.1(h) (consider and, in consultation
with the MAC, progress the evolution and development of the WEM and
these WEM Rules)). Clause 2.24.5E is therefore amended to extend the
list in clause 2.24.5E(b) to include the functions described in clause
2.2D.1(j).</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.24.5E For the purposes of clause 2.24.5C(b), the Coordinator need not
separately publish the proportion of costs corresponding to the function
described in clause 2.2D.1(d) and may consolidate the costs
corresponding to the following groups of functions:

\(a\) the functions described clauses 2.2D.1(a) and 2.2D.1(b); and

\(b\) the functions described in clauses 2.2D.1(c), 2.2D.1(f) to
2.2D.1(i) inclusive, and 2.2D.1(j).

2.24.6. By the date which is five Business Days prior to 30 June each
year, the Economic Regulation Authority must notify AEMO of the dollar
amount that the Economic Regulation Authority may recover under clause
2.24.5.

2.24.6A. By the date which is five Business Days prior to 30 June each
year, the Coordinator must notify AEMO of the dollar amount that the
Coordinator may recover under clause 2.24.5B.

2.24.7. The level of each Application Fee:

\(a\) must reflect the estimated average costs to AEMO of processing
that type of application;

\(b\) must be consistent with the Allowable Revenue approved by the
Economic Regulation Authority; and

\(c\) may be different for different classes of Rule Participant and
different classes of facility.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 2.25 is amended by the Governance Amendments that commence on
1 July 2021 to introduce "Coordinator Fees". However, as this section is
deleted and replaced by the Tranches 2 and 3 Amendments, this companion
version of the WEM Rules initially only showed the Tranches 2 and 3
Amendments as those amending rules (made by the Minister at the date
this companion version was prepared) will be commenced last. Please
refer to the Governance Amendments to see the changes to clauses 2.25.1,
2.25.1A, 2.25.2 and 2.25.4 that commenced on 1 July 2021 and the
Miscellaneous Amendments No. 2 for the further amendments to clauses
2.25.1A and 2.25.4 (i.e. minor grammatical correction and to remove a
redundant reference to System Management) that commenced on 1 October
2021.</p>
<p>Since then, further amendments to the relevant provisions amended by
the Tranches 2 and 3 Amendments have been made via the Tranche 6
Amendments to retain/reinstate the reference to Coordinator fees (i.e.
as "Market Participant Coordinator Fees").</p>
<p>Section 2.25 is amended to:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>make consequential changes to reflect weekly settlement;</p></li>
<li><p>remove references to System Management fee rate (and make
consequential changes) to reflect changed registration taxonomy;
and</p></li>
<li><p>remove the proportionality factor used to split total Market Fees
across ERA and AEMO, to reflect the new calculations in clause
9.12.</p></li>
</ul></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.25. Payment of Market Fees

2.25.1. AEMO must charge a Market Participant the relevant payment
amount for Market Participant Market Fees, Market Participant
Coordinator Fees and Market Participant Regulator Fees for a Trading
Week in accordance with section 9.12.

2.25.1A. AEMO is an agent for the collection of Market Participant
Coordinator Fees and Market Participant Regulator Fees payable by Market
Participants to AEMO.

2.25.1B. The Economic Regulation Authority must, if requested by AEMO,
do all things reasonably necessary (including entering into any
agreements) to enable AEMO to give effect to clause 2.25.1A.

2.25.1C. The Coordinator must, if requested by AEMO, use reasonable
endeavours to cooperate with AEMO, as AEMO endeavours to give effect to
clause 2.25.1A.

2.25.2. Each Market Participant must pay the relevant payment amount for
Market Participant Market Fees, Market Participant Coordinator Fees and
Market Participant Regulator Fees in accordance with Chapter 9.

2.25.3. Following receipt of a payment contemplated by clause 2.25.2,
AEMO must:

\(a\) transfer to the fund established under clause 9.18.9 the payment
received as calculated in clause 9.13.2;

\(b\) pay the Economic Regulation Authority the payment received as
calculated in clause 9.13.3; and

\(c\) pay the Coordinator the payment received as calculated in clause
9.13.4.

2.25.4. \[Blank\]

2.25.5. Rule Participants must pay the relevant Application Fee upon
submitting an application form in accordance with clause 2.31.2, or in
accordance with clause 4.9.3, as applicable.

Market Price Limits, Reviews and Loss Factors

2.26. Economic Regulation Authority Reviews of Market Price Limits and
the Methodology for Setting the Benchmark Reserve Capacity Price

2.26.1. The Economic Regulation Authority must, in accordance with this
section 2.26, review the value of the Energy Offer Price Ceiling at
least once every three years. For the avoidance of doubt, the Economic
Regulation Authority must complete a subsequent review under this clause
2.26.1 and publish its final report no later than three years from the
date of publication of the final report from the preceding review.

2.26.2. In conducting a review pursuant to clause 2.26.1, the Economic
Regulation Authority must calculate the Energy Offer Price Ceiling by:

\(a\) applying the following formula:

> (1 + Risk Margin) × (Variable O&M +(Heat Rate × Fuel Cost))/Loss
> Factor
>
> where:

i\. Risk Margin is a measure of uncertainty in the assessment of the
mean short run average cost for the highest cost Facility in the SWIS,
expressed as a fraction;

ii\. Variable O&M is the mean variable operating and maintenance cost
for the highest cost Facility in the SWIS, expressed in $/MWh, and
includes, but is not limited to, start-up related costs;

iii\. Heat Rate is the mean heat rate at the minimum dispatchable
loading level specified in Standing Data for the highest cost Facility
in the SWIS, expressed in GJ/MWh;

iv\. Fuel Cost is the mean unit fixed and variable fuel cost for the
highest cost Facility in the SWIS, expressed in $/GJ; and

v\. Loss Factor is the marginal loss factor for the highest cost
Facility in the SWIS, relative to the Reference Node, determined in
accordance with section 2.27,

where the Economic Regulation Authority must determine the values for
each factor described in clauses 2.26.2(a)(i) to 2.26.2(a)(v)
consistently with the Offer Construction Guideline as it applies to the
highest cost generating Facility in the SWIS;

\(b\) rounding up the value in clause 2.26.2(a) to the nearest multiple
of $100/MWh; and

\(c\) determining whether an indexation process should apply to the
Energy Offer Price Ceiling to reflect movements in input costs and, if
so, determining the formula for the indexation calculation and the
frequency at which indexation will apply.

Review of FCESS Offer Price Ceilings

2.26.2A. The Economic Regulation Authority must, in accordance with this
section 2.26, review the value of the Contingency Reserve Raise Offer
Price Ceiling, Contingency Reserve Lower Offer Price Ceiling, RoCoF
Control Service Offer Price Ceiling, Regulation Raise Offer Price
Ceiling and Regulation Lower Offer Price Ceiling at least once every
three years. For the avoidance of doubt, the Economic Regulation
Authority must complete a subsequent review under this clause 2.26.2A of
an FCESS Offer Price Ceiling and publish its final report no later than
three years from the date of publication of the final report from the
preceding review of that FCESS Offer Price Ceiling.

2.26.2B. In conducting a review pursuant to clause 2.26.2A, the Economic
Regulation Authority must determine the value of each FCESS Offer Price
Ceiling by:

\(a\) estimating, consistently with the Offer Construction Guideline as
it applies to the highest cost Facility providing the relevant Frequency
Co-optimised Essential System Service in the SWIS, the variable costs of
providing the Frequency Co‑optimised Essential System Service that are
not compensated through other market mechanisms in the Wholesale
Electricity Market;

\(b\) rounding up its determination of the value of the FCESS Offer
Price Ceiling to the nearest multiple of $50 per MW per hour or $50 per
MWs per hour, as applicable; and

\(c\) determining whether an indexation process should apply to the
FCESS Offer Price Ceiling to reflect movements in input costs and, if
so, determining the formula for the indexation calculation and the
frequency at which indexation will apply.

Review of Energy Offer Price Floor

2.26.2C. The Economic Regulation Authority must, in accordance with this
section 2.26, review the appropriateness of the value of the Energy
Offer Price Floor at least once every three years. For the avoidance of
doubt, the Economic Regulation Authority must complete a subsequent
review under this clause 2.26.2C and publish its final report no later
than three years from the date of publication of the final report from
the preceding review.

2.26.2D. In conducting a review required by clause 2.26.2C, the Economic
Regulation Authority must apply the following principles:

\(a\) the Economic Regulation Authority must only revise the value of
the Energy Offer Price Floor if it determines that the current value of
the Energy Offer Price Floor is not appropriate under clause 2.26.2E;

\(b\) if the Economic Regulation Authority determines that the current
Energy Offer Price Floor is not appropriate under clause 2.26.2E, the
revised value for the Energy Offer Price Floor must:

i\. allow for the Real-Time Market for energy to clear without the
Reference Trading Price being equal to the Energy Offer Price Floor in
most circumstances; and

ii\. subject to clause 2.26.2D(b)(i), limit the exposure of Market
Participants to Reference Trading Prices that are reasonably likely to
materially adversely affect the financial viability of a prudent Market
Participant.

2.26.2E. In determining whether the current value of the Energy Offer
Price Floor is not appropriate for the purposes of clause 2.26.2D(a),
the Economic Regulation Authority must consider, without limitation, if,
since the previous review of the value of the Energy Offer Price Floor
under this section 2.26:

\(a\) the Real-Time Market for energy has cleared at the Energy Offer
Price Floor in one or more Dispatch Intervals due to, in the Economic
Regulation Authority’s reasonable opinion, the Energy Offer Price Floor
being too high; and

\(b\) there has been a change in the generation fleet in the SWIS that,
in the Economic Regulation Authority’s reasonable opinion, is likely to
result in:

i\. the current Energy Offer Price Floor being materially lower than
necessary to achieve the criterion in clause 2.26.2D(b)(i), including,
but not limited to, an upgrade or the retirement of a Facility with high
cycling costs; or

ii\. the current Energy Offer Price Floor being too high to achieve the
criterion in clause 2.26.2D(b)(i), including, but not limited to, the
increase of cycling costs due to deterioration or ageing of a Facility.

2.26.2F. When reviewing the Energy Offer Price Floor in accordance with
this section 2.26, if the Economic Regulation Authority determines under
clause 2.26.2E that the Energy Offer Price Floor is not appropriate, the
Economic Regulation Authority must:

\(a\) determine for credible scenarios of low demand, the price at which
the operator of the Facility with the highest cycling costs per MW in
the SWIS in the scenario would, acting reasonably, decommit the Facility
should the Reference Trading Price equal or fall below that price for a
single Trading Interval;

\(b\) revise the Energy Offer Price Floor to be the highest price
determined under the scenarios in clause 2.26.2F(a) that is lower than
95 percent of all of the prices determined under clause 2.26.2F(a); and

\(c\) determine whether an indexation process should apply to the Energy
Offer Price Floor to reflect movements in input costs and, if so,
determine the formula for the indexation calculation and the frequency
at which indexation will apply.

2.26.2G. When determining the credible scenarios of low demand for the
purpose of clause 2.26.2F(a), the Economic Regulation Authority may use
historic scenarios but must also account for any changes expected in the
SWIS that would take effect prior to the time that the Energy Offer
Price Floor would apply and that are likely to have an effect on the
Reference Trading Price. The changes include, but are not limited to:

\(a\) expected changes in system demand;

\(b\) any expected entrance of a new Facility that will participate in
the Real-Time Market;

\(c\) expected changes to an existing Facility; and

\(d\) any expected permanent exit of a Facility from the Real-Time
Market.

2.26.2H. When determining the cycling costs of a Facility under clause
2.26.2F(a), the Economic Regulation Authority must consider:

\(a\) the factors that a Market Participant acting reasonably would
consider in making a decommitment decision for the Facility with the
highest cycling costs in the SWIS, assuming that all energy sent out by
the Facility is settled at the Reference Trading Price, including:

i\. the cost to decommit and recommit within the timeframe specified
under clause 2.26.2H(a)(iii), including start-related fuel costs and
variable operating and maintenance costs of the Facility;

ii\. the minimum stable level of operation of the Facility;

iii\. the minimum time the Facility must remain out of service once
decommitted before recommitment is possible; and

iv\. any expected losses or gains, opportunity costs and cost savings
that the Market Participant would incur as a result of decommitment for
the duration of the minimum time the Facility must remain out of service
before recommitment is possible; and

\(b\) any other matters that the Economic Regulation Authority considers
relevant.

2.26.2I. When determining the cycling costs of a Facility under clause
2.26.2F(a), the Economic Regulation Authority must have regard to the
Wholesale Market Objectives and must, as far as practicable, use
information about the costs the relevant Facility would incur as
provided by the relevant Market Participant but may use estimates where
the Economic Regulation Authority considers it to be reasonable.

2.26.2J. A Market Participant may, by the time specified for the close
of submissions under clause 2.26.2L(b), provide evidence to the Economic
Regulation Authority of the costs that a Facility incurs when
decommitting for the purpose of the WEM Rules and which the Economic
Regulation Authority must consider in determining the appropriateness of
the value of the Energy Offer Price Floor under clause 2.26.2C.

2.26.2K. Where a Market Participant provides the Economic Regulation
Authority with satisfactory evidence under clause 2.26.2J, the Economic
Regulation Authority must consider the information when determining the
appropriateness of the Energy Offer Price Floor as far as the
information affects the Economic Regulation Authority’s reasonable
estimate of any costs that a prudent Market Participant would incur when
decommitting its Facility in the scenarios under clause 2.26.2F(a).

Conducting a Review of a Market Price Limit

2.26.2L. In conducting a review of a Market Price Limit under clauses
2.26.1, 2.26.2A or 2.26.2C, the Economic Regulation Authority must
publish on its website:

\(a\) a draft report and a request for submissions;

\(b\) the closing date for submissions, which must be no earlier than
four weeks after the date of publication of the draft report; and

\(c\) a copy of all submissions received provided that if a submission
contains information that the Economic Regulation Authority reasonably
considers to be confidential, the Economic Regulation Authority may
redact that information to the extent it considers appropriate.

2.26.2M. Following the closing date for submissions on the draft report
published under clause 2.26.2L, the Economic Regulation Authority must
publish a final report on its website containing:

\(a\) the issues identified by the Economic Regulation Authority;

\(b\) the assumptions made by the Economic Regulation Authority in
undertaking the review;

\(c\) the Economic Regulation Authority’s determination of the relevant
Market Price Limit, which is to include, where applicable:

i\. the revised value of the relevant Market Price Limit;

ii\. the Trading Day from which the revised value of the relevant Market
Price Limit will take effect, which must be at least five Business Days
after the date the final report is published; and

iii\. any indexation process in the value of the relevant Market Price
Limit and the associated times each indexed value will apply from;

\(d\) how the Economic Regulation Authority determined the revised value
of the relevant Market Price Limit, including any analysis and
calculation parameters used in its determination;

\(e\) a summary of any submissions received by the Economic Regulation
Authority on the draft report published under clause 2.26.2L that were
received within the time specified, and any late submissions the
Economic Regulation Authority has decided, in its discretion, to take
into account;

\(f\) the Economic Regulation Authority’s responses to the issues raised
in those submissions; and

\(g\) any other matters the Economic Regulation Authority considers
relevant to the review.

2.26.2N. Where a Rule Participant considers there has been a material
change in circumstances since the Economic Regulation Authority's most
recent review of a Market Price Limit pursuant to clauses 2.26.1,
2.26.2A or 2.26.2C, as applicable, the Rule Participant may, subject to
clause 2.26.2O(a), notify the Economic Regulation Authority that it
considers the Market Price Limit is no longer appropriate in accordance
with clause 2.26.2O.

2.26.2NA. If a Rule Participant considers there has been a material
change in market circumstances since the Economic Regulation Authority's
most recent review of a Market Price Limit pursuant to clauses 2.26.1,
2.26.2A or 2.26.2C, as applicable, the Rule Participant may, subject to
clause 2.26.2O(a), notify the Economic Regulation Authority that it
considers that for the Market Price Limit, the determination to apply or
not apply indexation to the Market Price Limit is no longer appropriate
in accordance with clause 2.26.2O.

2.26.2O. A notice by a Rule Participant under clauses 2.26.2N or
2.26.2NA must:

\(a\) be given no earlier than six months after completion of the most
recent review of the relevant Market Price Limit by the Economic
Regulation Authority under clauses 2.26.1, 2.26.2A or 2.26.2C, as
applicable; and

\(b\) set out the Rule Participant’s reasoning, with any supporting
analysis, as to why it considers there has been:

> i\. a material change in circumstances such that the relevant Market
> Price Limit is no longer appropriate, having regard to the relevant
> matters in this section 2.26; or
>
> ii\. a material change in market circumstances such that the
> determination to apply or not apply indexation to a Market Price Limit
> is no longer appropriate.

2.26.2P. Following receipt of a notice under clause 2.26.2N, the
Economic Regulation Authority must, as soon as practicable:

\(a\) after considering the information in the notice, determine whether
it considers it is appropriate to bring forward the next required review
of the relevant Market Price Limit under clauses 2.26.1, 2.26.2A or
2.26.2C, as applicable;

\(b\) in making its determination under clause 2.26.2P(a), have regard
to the Wholesale Market Objectives and any benefits of undertaking an
earlier review; and

\(c\) publish its response to the notice on its website, which is to
include details of whether a review of the relevant Market Price Limit
will be progressed, the proposed timing for the review, and the reasons
for its decision.

2.26.2Q. If the Economic Regulation Authority decides to bring forward a
review of a Market Price Limit pursuant to clause 2.26.2P(a), the
Economic Regulation Authority must use its best endeavours to conduct
the review in accordance with the proposed timing published in its
response to the relevant notice in accordance with clause 2.26.2P(c).

2.26.2R. In conducting a review of a Market Price Limit under clauses
2.26.1, 2.26.2A or 2.26.2C, the Economic Regulation Authority may
request information from a Market Participant.

2.26.2S. An information request by the Economic Regulation Authority
under clause 2.26.2R must specify the time by which the information
specified in the request must be provided by the Market Participant,
which must be at least 10 Business Days after the date of the request
and be reasonable having regard to the nature of the information
requested.

2.26.2T. Following receipt of a request under clause 2.26.2R, the Market
Participant must provide the information specified in the request by the
time specified in the request.

2.26.2U. Where the Economic Regulation Authority determines under
clauses 2.26.2(c), 2.26.2B(c) or 2.26.2F(c) that indexation in the value
of a Market Price Limit will apply, the Economic Regulation Authority
must:

\(a\) calculate each indexed value for the Market Price Limit in
accordance with the process and schedule determined under clause
2.26.2M(c)(iii); and

\(b\) for each indexed value calculated under clause 2.26.2U(a):

i\. publish on its website the indexed value and the Trading Day from
which the indexed value will take effect; and

ii\. notify AEMO of the publication of the indexed value,

at least five Business Days before the Trading Day from which the
indexed value will take effect.

2.26.2V. A revised value for a Market Price Limit replaces the previous
value after the Economic Regulation Authority has published its final
report in accordance with clause 2.26.2M, with effect from the Trading
Day specified in the final report or, in the case of an indexed value,
the Trading Day published by the Economic Regulation Authority on its
website in accordance with clause 2.26.2U.

2.26.2W. AEMO must publish on the WEM Website each revised value of a
Market Price Limit and the Trading Day from which the revised value will
take effect within five Business Days after the Economic Regulation
Authority publishes the relevant information under clauses 2.26.2M(c) or
2.26.2U(b).

2.26.3. At least once in every five years, the Economic Regulation
Authority must review the methodology for setting the Benchmark Reserve
Capacity Price. A review must examine:

\(a\) the appropriateness of the parameters and methodology in section
4.16 and the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 4.16.3 for
recalculating the Benchmark Reserve Capacity Price; and

\(b\) any other matters which the Economic Regulation Authority
considers relevant.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>The timing for the review of the Benchmark Reserve Capacity Price WEM
Procedure stated in clause 4.16.9 is unchanged.</p>
<p>The requirement for a 5 yearly review of the effectiveness of certain
factors relating to the Reserve Capacity Price is set out in new clause
2.26.3A. Each review is to be undertaken by the ERA at the same time as
it reviews the methodology for setting the Benchmark Reserve Capacity
Price specified in clause 2.26.3.</p>
<p>However, a new transitional clause 1.31.1 precludes the ERA from
undertaking the first review of the effectiveness of certain factors
relating to the Reserve Capacity Price before the end of the 2019
Reserve Capacity Cycle (i.e. not before 30 September 2022).</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.26.3A. The Economic Regulation Authority must review the Reserve
Capacity Price Factors at the same time as each review of the Benchmark
Reserve Capacity Price under clause 2.26.3. A review must examine:

\(a\) whether the Reserve Capacity Price Factors efficiently signal the
long-term economic value of incremental or excess Reserve Capacity in
the Wholesale Electricity Market;

\(b\) whether the Reserve Capacity Price calculated using the Reserve
Capacity Price Factors is consistent with the Wholesale Market
Objectives; and

\(c\) any other matters the Economic Regulation Authority considers to
be relevant.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.26.4 is amended as a consequence of new clause
2.26.3A.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.26.4. The Economic Regulation Authority must provide a report to the
Minister on the reviews conducted under clauses 2.26.3 and 2.26.3A.

2.26.5. If the Economic Regulation Authority recommends changes as a
result of the report prepared under clause 2.26.4, the Economic
Regulation Authority must either submit a Rule Change Proposal or
initiate a Procedure Change Process, as the case may be, to implement
those changes.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clauses 2.27.1(a) and 2.27.5(d) are amended by the Tranche 5
Amendments to reflect the amended registration taxonomy and registration
processes.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.27. Determination of Loss Factors

2.27.1. Network Operators must, in accordance with this section 2.27,
calculate and provide to AEMO Loss Factors for:

\(a\) each connection point in their Networks at which any of the
following is connected:

i\. a Scheduled Facility;

iA. a Semi-Scheduled Facility;

ii\. a Non-Scheduled Facility; or

iii\. \[Blank\]

iv\. \[Blank\]

v\. a Non-Dispatchable Load equipped with an interval meter; and

\(b\) in the case of Western Power, the Notional Wholesale Meter.

2.27.2. A Market Participant may request, during the process of
obtaining a relevant Arrangement for Access, that the relevant Network
Operator determine and provide to AEMO Loss Factors to apply to a
Facility where there are no Loss Factors applying to the connection
point at which the Facility will be connected.

2.27.3. Loss Factors must reflect transmission and distribution losses
and each Loss Factor must be expressed as the product of a Transmission
Loss Factor and a Distribution Loss Factor.

2.27.4. Subject to clause 2.27.5(d), for each Network Operator AEMO
must, in consultation with that Network Operator, develop a
classification system to assign each of the connection points in the
Network Operator’s Network identified under clause 2.27.1(a) to a
Transmission Loss Factor Class and a Distribution Loss Factor Class,
where:

\(a\) the assignment of a connection point to a Loss Factor Class is
based on characteristics indicative of the expected transmission or
distribution system losses (as applicable) for the connection point;

\(b\) each connection point in a Loss Factor Class is assigned the same
Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor (as applicable);
and

\(c\) connection points on the transmission system are assigned to a
Distribution Loss Factor Class with a Distribution Loss Factor equal to
one.

2.27.5. In calculating Loss Factors, Network Operators must apply the
following principles:

\(a\) Transmission Loss Factors must notionally represent the marginal
transmission system losses for a connection point relative to the
Reference Node, averaged over all Trading Intervals in a year, weighted
by the absolute value of the net demand at that connection point during
the Trading Interval;

\(b\) Distribution Loss Factors must notionally represent the average
distribution system losses for a connection point over a year;

\(c\) Loss Factors must be calculated using:

i\. generation and load meter data from the preceding 12 months; or

ii\. for a new Facility, any other relevant data provided to the Network
Operator by the Market Participant and as agreed with the Network
Operator and AEMO; and

iii\. for Transmission Loss Factors, an appropriate network load flow
software package;

\(d\) a specific Loss Factor must be calculated for each:

i\. Scheduled Facility;

iA. Semi-Scheduled Facility;

ii\. Non-Scheduled Facility; and

iii\. \[Blank\]

iv\. \[Blank\]

v\. Non-Dispatchable Load above 7000 kVA peak consumption;

\(e\) Western Power must assign the Notional Wholesale Meter to:

i\. a Transmission Loss Factor Class that represents system wide average
marginal losses over Western Power’s transmission system; and

ii\. a Distribution Loss Factor Class that represents the average losses
incurred over Western Power’s distribution system by Non-Dispatchable
Loads not equipped with an interval meter; and

\(f\) the Transmission Loss Factors calculated for each Transmission
Loss Factor Class and the Distribution Loss Factors calculated for each
Distribution Loss Factor Class are static, and apply to each connection
point in the relevant Loss Factor Class until the time published by AEMO
under clause 2.27.8 for the application of an updated Transmission Loss
Factor or Distribution Loss Factor to that Loss Factor Class.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.27.5A is amended to remove the reference to Demand Side
Programmes, because they are no longer included in the Dispatch
Algorithm and so do not require a single Loss Factor.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.27.5A. For each Interruptible Load, AEMO must use a Loss Factor of 1.

2.27.6. Each year by 1 June each Network Operator must, in accordance
with the WEM Procedure specified in clause 2.27.17, recalculate the Loss
Factors for its connection points and provide AEMO with updated
Transmission Loss Factors and Distribution Loss Factors (as applicable)
for each Loss Factor Class in the Network Operator’s classification
system.

2.27.7. AEMO must publish the Transmission Loss Factors and Distribution
Loss Factors provided by a Network Operator in accordance with clause
2.27.6 within two Business Days after receiving them.

2.27.8. When Transmission Loss Factors and Distribution Loss Factors are
published in accordance with clause 2.27.7 or where one or more
Transmission Loss Factors or Distribution Loss Factors are changed in
accordance with clauses 2.27.15(e) or 2.27.16 AEMO must publish the time
from which the new Transmission Loss Factors or Distribution Loss
Factors will apply, where this must be from the commencement of a
Trading Day.

2.27.9. In setting the time from which a Transmission Loss Factor or
Distribution Loss Factor will apply in accordance with clause 2.27.8
AEMO must allow sufficient time for Rule Participants to identify and
update any submission or forecast data that is dependent on Loss
Factors.

2.27.10. A Network Operator must develop new Loss Factor Classes if
required to implement the classification system prescribed by AEMO for
that Network Operator. If a Network Operator develops a new Loss Factor
Class then it must:

\(a\) calculate the initial Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution
Loss Factor (as applicable) for the new Loss Factor Class in accordance
with the WEM Procedure specified in clause 2.27.17; and

\(b\) provide to AEMO details of the new Loss Factor Class and its
initial Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor as soon as
practicable but before a connection point is assigned to the new Loss
Factor Class.

2.27.11. AEMO must publish a new Transmission Loss Factor or
Distribution Loss Factor provided by a Network Operator in accordance
with clause 2.27.10(b) within two Business Days after receiving it from
the Network Operator.

2.27.12. A Network Operator must determine the Transmission Loss Factor
Class and Distribution Loss Factor Class for each new connection point
in its Network identified under clause 2.27.1(a), in accordance with the
classification system prescribed by AEMO for that Network Operator.

2.27.13. A Network Operator must re-determine the Loss Factor Classes
for a connection point in its Network identified under clause 2.27.1(a)
if a change occurs to the connection point that might alter its
applicable Loss Factor Classes under the classification system
prescribed by AEMO for that Network Operator.

2.27.14. When a Network Operator determines a Loss Factor Class for a
connection point under clause 2.27.12 or changes a Loss Factor Class for
a connection point under clause 2.27.13, the Network Operator must
provide to both AEMO and the relevant Market Participant the new Loss
Factor Class for the connection point and the Trading Day from which it
takes effect, as soon as practicable but before the information is
required for use in calculations under the WEM Rules.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.27.15 is amended to use the new registration
taxonomy.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.27.15. A Market Participant may apply to AEMO for a reassessment of
any Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor applying to a
Scheduled Facility, Semi-Scheduled Facility, Non-Scheduled Facility or
Non-Dispatchable Load registered to that Market Participant. The
following requirements apply to each application for reassessment:

\(a\) The Market Participant must apply for reassessment in accordance
with the WEM Procedure specified in clause 2.27.17.

\(b\) AEMO must process an application for reassessment and where
required conduct an audit of the relevant Loss Factor calculation in
accordance with the WEM Procedure specified in clause 2.27.17.

\(c\) The relevant Network Operator must cooperate with an audit of the
Loss Factor calculation conducted by AEMO under clause 2.27.15(b) by
providing reasonable access to the data and calculations used in
producing the Loss Factor.

\(d\) Where an audit reveals an error in the calculation of a
Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor for a Loss Factor
Class, AEMO must direct the Network Operator to recalculate the
Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor, and may instruct
the Network Operator to recalculate other Transmission Loss Factors or
Distribution Loss Factors provided by that Network Operator.

\(e\) Where AEMO directs the Network Operator to recalculate a
Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor for a Loss Factor
Class, then the Network Operator must do so, and must provide the
recalculated Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor to
AEMO. The recalculated Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss
Factor is substituted for the value previously applied with effect from
the time published by AEMO in accordance with clause 2.27.8.

\(f\) Where an audit reveals an error in the assignment of a connection
point to a Loss Factor Class, AEMO must direct the relevant Network
Operator to correct the error and re-determine the Loss Factor Class for
the connection point in accordance with the classification system
prescribed by AEMO for that Network Operator.

\(g\) Where AEMO directs a Network Operator to re-determine a Loss
Factor Class for a connection point, then the Network Operator must do
so, and must as soon as reasonably practicable provide to AEMO and the
relevant Market Participant the revised Loss Factor Class and the
Trading Day from which it should apply.

\(h\) The costs of an audit conducted by AEMO in response to an
application for reassessment, including any costs incurred by the
Network Operator and any costs, not otherwise included in AEMO’s budget,
incurred by AEMO, are payable by the Market Participant who made the
application for reassessment, unless the audit reveals:

i\. an error of more than 0.0025 in the calculation of a Transmission
Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor; or

ii\. an incorrect assignment of a Connection Point to a Loss Factor
Class,

in which case all costs are payable by the relevant Network Operator.

2.27.16. Where a Network Operator fails to provide AEMO with a
Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor in accordance with
clause 2.27.6 or 2.27.15(d), AEMO must continue to use the equivalent
Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor from the previous
year until such time as the Network Operator has provided AEMO with the
new Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor and that
Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor has taken effect.
The recalculated Transmission Loss Factor or Distribution Loss Factor is
substituted for the value previously applied with effect from the time
published by AEMO in accordance with clause 2.27.8.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Currently, AEMO is responsible for the Loss Factors WEM Procedure
referred to in 2.27.17 with the assistance of Network Operators.
However, as the WEM Procedure sets out how Network Operators determine
Loss Factors, it is more appropriate for each Network Operator to be
responsible for the WEM Procedure. Accordingly, clause 2.27.17 is
amended to make Network Operators responsible for documenting and
maintaining a WEM Procedure for Loss Factors.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.27.17. Each Network Operator must document in a WEM Procedure the
standards, methodologies, classification systems and procedures to be
used in determining Loss Factors.

2.27.18. AEMO may at any time review the effectiveness of the processes
used by a Network Operator for Loss Factor calculation in meeting the
Wholesale Market Objectives.

2.27.19. AEMO may request, and a Network Operator must provide, any
information relating to the methodologies, models, software, data
sources and internal procedures used by the Network Operator for Loss
Factor calculation that AEMO considers relevant to a review conducted
under clause 2.27.18.

Network Congestion and Constraint Equations

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 2.27A sets out the new framework for constraint-related
obligations and associated processes, including:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>the development, provision and clarification of Limit
Advice;</p></li>
<li><p>the formulation of Constraint Equations; and</p></li>
<li><p>the processes to be documented in WEM Procedures.</p></li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li><p>Section 2.27A is further amended to avoid duplication of any
clauses in new section 4.4B which deals with RCM Limit Advice and RCM
Constraint Equations and the inadvertent application of parts of clause
2.27A applying to RCM Limit Advice.</p></li>
</ul></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.27A. Limit Advice and Constraint Equations

2.27A.1. A Network Operator must, in accordance with this section 2.27A,
provide Limit Advice in respect to its Network to AEMO.

2.27A.2. Information to be provided to AEMO by a Network Operator in
respect to limitations of, or relating to, its Network that gives rise
to a Network Constraint ("**Limit Advice**") includes:

\(a\) Limit Equations in respect of Network Limits provided in
accordance with this section 2.27A or section 4.4B, excluding Limit
Equations for Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Services or, if,
in respect of a particular Network element, a mathematical expression is
not appropriate, the Network Limits for that particular Network element;

\(b\) Limit Advice Inputs; and

\(c\) supporting information and data specified in the WEM Procedure
referred to in clause 2.27A.10(a).

2.27A.3. A Network Operator must provide Limit Advice to AEMO in the
form and by the dates and times specified in:

\(a\) for RCM Limit Advice, section 4.4B and the WEM Procedure referred
to in clause 2.27A.10(a); and

\(b\) for all other Limit Advice, the WEM Procedure referred to in
clause 2.27A.10(a).

2.27A.4. AEMO may, if it reasonably considers it is required to enable
it to carry out its obligations specified in clause 2.27A.7, request:

\(a\) clarification or further information regarding any aspect of
information provided under clause 2.27A.2 from the Network Operator who
provided it to AEMO; and

\(b\) additional Limit Advice from a Network Operator,

and each Network Operator must comply with any such request in
accordance with WEM Procedures referred to in clauses 2.27A.10(a) and
2.27A.10(d).

2.27A.5. Any information provided by a Network Operator in response to a
request by AEMO under clause 2.27A.4(a) is Limit Advice for the purpose
of clause 2.27A.2.

2.27A.6. A Network Operator must, in respect of:

\(a\) RCM Limit Advice:

i\. use its reasonable endeavours to ensure that all necessary RCM Limit
Advice is complete, current and accurate at the time it is provided to
AEMO;

ii\. if it forms the view that any RCM Limit Advice is no longer
complete, current or accurate prior to the latest date the RCM Limit
Advice is required to be provided to AEMO under section 4.4B, promptly
provide updated RCM Limit Advice to AEMO; and

iii\. update Limit Advice required to be updated under clause
2.27A.6(a)(ii) in accordance with the WEM Procedure referred to in
clause 2.27A.10(a).

\(b\) all other Limit Advice:

i\. use its reasonable endeavours to ensure that all necessary Limit
Advice is complete, current and accurate at the time it is provided to
AEMO;

ii\. promptly notify AEMO if it forms the view that any Limit Advice is
no longer complete, current or accurate, including where Limit Advice is
no longer required; and

iii\. update Limit Advice in accordance with the WEM Procedure referred
to in clause 2.27A.10(a).

2.27A.7. AEMO must:

\(a\) formulate Constraint Equations in accordance with the WEM
Procedure referred to in clause 2.27A.10(b);

(aA) formulate Preliminary RCM Constraint Equations and RCM Constraint
Equations in accordance with clause 4.4B.4;

\(b\) develop and maintain the Constraints Library in accordance with
the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.27A.10(c);

\(c\) use its reasonable endeavours to ensure that:

i\. RCM Constraint Equations are complete and accurate at the time the
RCM Constraint Equation is formulated; and

ii\. all necessary other Constraint Equations are complete, current and
accurate; and

\(d\) update Constraint Equations, publish updates to the Constraints
Library and notify Rule Participants of updates to the Constraints
Library in accordance with the WEM Procedures referred to in clauses
2.27A.10(b) and 2.27A.10(c).

2.27A.8. A Constraint Equation that is updated by AEMO under clause
2.27A.7(d) is effective from the date and time determined by AEMO.

2.27A.9. The principles that must be taken into account by each Network
Operator in developing Limit Advice, and by AEMO in formulating
Constraint Equations, are:

\(a\) the Wholesale Market Objectives; and

\(b\) good electricity industry practice.

2.27A.10. AEMO must document in a WEM Procedure:

\(a\) in respect of the information to be provided by a Network Operator
to AEMO under clause 2.27A.2:

i\. the information and data to be provided by each Network Operator to
AEMO; and

ii\. the processes to be followed for the provision of and, where
applicable, updates to such information and any other information
referred to in clause 2.27A.4, from each Network Operator to AEMO,
including:

1\. the format, form and manner in which such information must be
provided; and

2\. where these WEM Rules do not provide a timeframe for the provision
of such information to AEMO, the reasonable times by which such
information must be provided having regard to the scope and nature of
the information to be provided;

\(b\) the processes to be followed by AEMO and the matters it must
consider in formulating and, where applicable, updating Constraint
Equations, (including RCM Constraint Equations), including:

i\. the approach to be taken by AEMO in applying:

1\. an Operating Margin; and

2\. the principles described in clause 2.27A.9; and

ii\. the conventions for assigning a unique identifier to Constraint
Equations and Constraint Sets;

(bA) the processes it must follow in providing the information to
Network Operators under clause 4.4B.2;

\(c\) the processes to be followed by AEMO in developing and updating
the Constraints Library and notifying Market Participants of updates to
the Constraints Library;

(cA) the processes to be followed and the methodology to be used by AEMO
in determining Constraint Equation terms and coefficients for Network
Constraints, including the methodology for determining whether the
exclusion of a variable from a Fully Co-optimised Network Constraint
Equation would have a material effect on Power System Security due to
the size of its coefficient;

(cB) the processes to be followed and the methodology to be used by AEMO
in selecting one or more Constraint Equations to represent a Network
Constraint, including in respect of the location of terms on each side
of the Constraint Equation;

(cC) the processes and timeframes to be followed by AEMO for creating
new Constraint Equations and Constraint Sets in response to a
Non-Credible Contingency Event;

(cD) wherever a Network Limit gives rise to a Network Constraint, the
supporting information and data a Network Operator must provide AEMO;
and

\(d\) any other processes or procedures relating to Constraints or
Network congestion that AEMO considers are reasonably required to enable
it to carry out its functions under the WEM Rules.

2.27A.11. Each Network Operator must document in a WEM Procedure:

\(a\) the processes to be followed by the Network Operator and the
matters it must consider in developing and updating Limit Advice,
including the approach to be taken by the Network Operator in applying:

i\. a Limit Margin; and

ii\. the principles described in clause 2.27A.9; and

\(b\) the processes to be followed by a Network Operator for:

i\. estimating the configuration and Thermal Network Limits of its
Network in accordance with clause 4.4B.3; and

ii\. allocating the value referred to in clause 4.4B.5(a) for each
Electrical Location in accordance with clause 4.4B.5(b).

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 2.27B sets out the framework for a new Congestion Information
Resource, including that AEMO:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>develops and maintains a Congestion Information Resource on the
WEM Website, and specifies the information to be published in that
resource; and</p></li>
<li><p>prepares and publishes an annual congestion report with respect
to the matters described in clause 2.27B.6.</p></li>
</ul></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.27B. Congestion Information Resource

2.27B.1. The objective of the Congestion Information Resource is to
provide information in a cost-effective and timely manner to Rule
Participants and other interested stakeholders to enable them to
understand patterns of Network congestion and the market impact of
Network congestion (“**Congestion Information Resource Objective**”).

2.27B.2. To implement the Congestion Information Resource Objective,
AEMO must:

\(a\) develop and maintain a Congestion Information Resource in
accordance with this section 2.27B; and

\(b\) publish the Congestion Information Resource on the WEM Website.

2.27B.3. The Congestion Information Resource must include:

\(a\) the Constraints Library;

\(b\) as soon as practicable after a Dispatch Interval, each Constraint
Equation that bound during the Dispatch Interval;

\(c\) each report described in clauses 2.27B.6 and 7.2.7(b);

\(d\) any other information that AEMO, in its reasonable opinion,
considers relevant to implement the Congestion Information Resource
Objective; and

\(e\) any other information specified in the WEM Procedure referred to
in clause 2.27B.8.

2.27B.4. AEMO must keep up to date the information in the Congestion
Information Resource (excluding, for the avoidance of doubt, an annual
congestion report described in clause 2.27B.6):

\(a\) consistently with the Congestion Information Resource Objective;
and

\(b\) in accordance with the processes and by the dates and times
specified in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.27B.8.

2.27B.5. Each Network Operator must do all things reasonably necessary
to support AEMO in carrying out its obligations under this section
2.27B, including providing AEMO with any information or data that AEMO
reasonably requires.

2.27B.6. AEMO must prepare and publish an annual congestion report by 31
March each year. A report must contain:

\(a\) information on Network congestion for at least the period of 12
months commencing at the start of the Trading Day which commences on 1
October and ending at the end of the Trading Day ending on 1 October of
the following calendar year immediately preceding the due date of the
report specified in this clause 2.27B.6, including:

i\. analysis of the Constraint Equations that bound during a Dispatch
Interval, including the duration and frequency; and

ii\. assessment of the market impact of Network congestion;

\(b\) information that is known to AEMO at the time of preparing the
annual congestion report in accordance with this section 2.27B that is
likely to affect, or could result in, Network congestion including:

i\. new connections to the SWIS;

ii\. augmentations of the SWIS;

iii\. decommissioning of a generating system, Load or any Network
elements; and

iv\. changes to Network elements;

\(c\) any other information that AEMO, in its reasonable opinion,
considers relevant to implement the Congestion Information Resource
Objective; and

\(d\) any other information or matters specified in the WEM Procedure
referred to in clause 2.27B.8.

2.27B.7. In preparing a report described in clause 2.27B.6, AEMO must
consult with each Network Operator.

2.27B.8. AEMO must document in a WEM Procedure:

\(a\) the information to be published in the Congestion Information
Resource;

\(b\) the processes to be followed by AEMO in maintaining, publishing
and updating the information in the Congestion Information Resource;

\(c\) the processes to be followed by AEMO in preparing a report
described in clause 2.27B.6; and

\(d\) the information that AEMO may reasonably require a Network
Operator or other Rule Participant to provide to AEMO to assist it with
carrying out its obligations under this section 2.27B, and:

i\. the format, form and manner in which any such information must be
provided; and

ii\. the date and time by which any such information must be provided.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 2.27C requires the ERA to undertake a periodic review of
Limit Advice provided by Network Operators and Constraint Equations
formulated by AEMO and sets out the processes associated with such
reviews.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.27C. Economic Regulation Authority Review of Limit Advice and
Constraint Equations

2.27C.1. The Economic Regulation Authority must review the effectiveness
of:

\(a\) Limit Advice provided by each Network Operator to AEMO; and

\(b\) Constraint Equations formulated by AEMO,

in meeting the principles described in clause 2.27A.9.

2.27C.2. A review conducted under clause 2.27C.1 must examine:

\(a\) the appropriateness of any Limit Margin applied by each Network
Operator;

\(b\) the appropriateness of any Operating Margin applied by AEMO;

\(c\) the appropriateness of the WEM Procedures described in clauses
2.27A.10(b)(i) and 2.27A.11; and

\(d\) any other matters which the Economic Regulation Authority
considers relevant.

2.27C.3. Without limiting clause 2.27C.2, the Economic Regulation
Authority may determine the scope of the Limit Advice and Constraint
Equations to be reviewed in accordance with clause 2.27C.1.

2.27C.4. In conducting a review under clause 2.27C.1, the Economic
Regulation Authority must publish a draft report and invite submissions,
and publish all submissions received, from Rule Participants and any
other interested stakeholders.

2.27C.5. In conducting a review under clause 2.27C.1, the Economic
Regulation Authority must publish a final report containing:

\(a\) the scope of the review as determined by the Economic Regulation
Authority in accordance with clause 2.27C.3;

\(b\) the issues identified by the Economic Regulation Authority;

\(c\) the assumptions made by the Economic Regulation Authority in
undertaking the review;

\(d\) the results of any technical and cost-benefit studies;

\(e\) a summary of any submissions on the draft report received by the
Economic Regulation Authority from Rule Participants and other
interested stakeholders in accordance with clause 2.27C.4;

\(f\) the Economic Regulation Authority’s responses to the issues raised
in those submissions;

\(g\) any recommendations of the Economic Regulation Authority; and

\(h\) any other matters the Economic Regulation Authority considers
relevant to the review.

2.27C.6. The Economic Regulation Authority must complete a review under
clause 2.27C.1:

\(a\) for the first review, within two years of the New WEM Commencement
Day; and

\(b\) for each subsequent review, at least once every three years from
the completion of the preceding review under this section 2.27C.

2.27C.7. The Economic Regulation Authority may request, and AEMO and
each Network Operator must provide, any information and documents,
including methodologies, models, software, data sources and internal
procedures, used by:

\(a\) the Network Operator, in respect to Limit Advice provided by the
relevant Network Operator to AEMO; and

\(b\) AEMO, in respect to the Constraint Equations formulated by it,

that the Economic Regulation Authority considers relevant to a review
conducted under clause 2.27C.1.

Participation and Registration

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.28.1 has been amended to reflect the Taskforce's decisions
described in the <em>Information Paper: Registration and Participation
Framework in the Wholesale Electricity Market</em>.</p>
<p>A new ‘Market Participant’ class will be created to replace the
existing Market Generator, Market Customer and Ancillary Service
Provider classes. This category will denote a participant who provides
or consumes a WEM product or service (i.e. any participant that is part
of the financial settlement process). A Market Participant will have
obligations in respect of its Facilities, therefore, a Market
Participant must register its Facilities, subject to any exemptions
permitted under the WEM Rules.</p>
<p>No change is required to the Network Operator class.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.28. Rule Participants

2.28.1. The classes of Rule Participant are:

\(a\) Network Operator;

\(b\) Market Participant; and

\(c\) AEMO.

2.28.2. Subject to clauses 2.28.3 and 2.28.16, a person who owns,
controls or operates a transmission system or distribution system which
forms part of the South West Interconnected System, or is electrically
connected to that system, must register as a Rule Participant in the
Network Operator class.

2.28.3. A person that owns, controls or operates a transmission system
or distribution system may, but is not required to, register as a Rule
Participant in the Network Operator class where both the following are
satisfied:

\(a\) AEMO has determined that it does not require information about the
relevant network to ensure Power System Security and Power System
Reliability are maintained; and

\(b\) no Registered Facilities owned or operated by a Market Participant
are directly connected to the transmission system or distribution
system.

2.28.3A. A Network Operator must:

\(a\) promptly provide to AEMO all data available to it and reasonably
required to model the static and dynamic performance of the SWIS,
including (without limitation) computer models of the performance of the
Network and Facilities connected, or which may be connected in the
future, to the Network;

\(b\) promptly forward to AEMO subsequent updates of the data referred
to in clause 2.28.3A(a);

\(c\) use its reasonable endeavours to ensure that all data referred to
in this clause 2.28.3A is complete, current and accurate;

\(d\) promptly notify AEMO if there are any reasonable grounds for
suspecting that the data provided under this clause 2.28.3A is no longer
complete, current and accurate; and

\(e\) include as part of the data provided to AEMO under this clause
2.28.3A:

i\. all data provided to the Network Operator that is used for the
purpose of modelling in relation to the SWIS by Market Participants,
other generators, customers and storage providers, other Network
Operators and any other source;

ii\. all data relating to actual, committed or proposed modifications to
the SWIS that the Network Operator reasonably considers are relevant to
modelling in relation to the SWIS; and

iii\. data relating to any Facility with a System Size which is less
than 10 MW and is likely to be subject to constraints that may affect
Power System Security and Power System Reliability.

2.28.3B. Where AEMO:

\(a\) is satisfied that the performance of a Facility (or equipment
within the Facility) is not adequately represented by any applicable
data either provided under clause 2.28.3A or as part of a Registered
Generator Performance Standard; and

\(b\) holds the reasonable opinion that the inadequacy of the applicable
data, is or will impede AEMO's ability to carry out its functions in
relation to Power System Security and Power System Reliability,

AEMO may:

\(c\) where that Facility is not required to comply with the
requirements under clause 3A.2.2, request that the Network Operator
provide to AEMO, as soon as reasonably practicable, revised or
additional data and an associated model validation report demonstrating
to AEMO’s reasonable satisfaction that the performance of the Facility
(or equipment within the Facility) has been tested and is performing
substantially in accordance with the revised modelling data; and

\(d\) direct the relevant Market Participant, or Network Operator where
relevant, to operate the Facility (or equipment within the Facility) at
a particular level of output or in a particular manner, until either the
Market Participant is compliant with clause 3A.2.2 or until the Network
Operator has submitted revised data and an associated model validation
report under clause 2.28.3B(c), and AEMO is satisfied that the
performance of the Facility (or equipment within the Facility) is
performing substantially in accordance with that data.

2.28.4. A person who intends to own, control or operate a transmission
system or distribution system which will form part of the South West
Interconnected System, or will be electrically connected to that system,
may register as a Rule Participant in the Network Operator class.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.28.5 is amended to reverse the change made in the Tranches 2
and 3 Amendments. The original clause is restored because the removal of
the ability for a Network Operator to be registered in more than one
Rule Participant class may adversely affect current Market
Participants.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.28.5. Subject to clause 2.28.16, a person registered as a Network
Operator may be registered as a Rule Participant in another class or
other classes.

2.28.6. Subject to clause 2.28.16, a person who owns, controls or
operates a Facility containing an Energy Producing System with a System
Size that equals or exceeds 10 MW and is electrically connected to a
transmission system or distribution system which forms part of the South
West Interconnected System, or is electrically connected to that system,
must register as a Rule Participant in the Market Participant class.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.28.7 is amended and clause 2.28.7A added to reflect the new
registration framework where a person who owns, controls or operates a
facility with a System Size of between 5 MW and 10 MW may apply to AEMO
for an exemption from the requirement to register. AEMO will process an
application for exemption in accordance with exemption criteria that
AEMO will be required to specify in a WEM Procedure. AEMO will be
required to grant an exemption other than for reasons of Power System
Security and Power System Reliability.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.28.7. A person that owns, controls or operates a Facility containing
an Energy Producing System with a System Size of less than 10 MW, but
which equals or exceeds 5 MW, and is electrically connected to a
transmission system or distribution system which forms part of the South
West Interconnected System, or is electrically connected to that system,
must apply to AEMO:

\(a\) for registration as a Rule Participant in the Market Participant
class; or

\(b\) for an exemption from the requirement to register as a Rule
Participant in the Market Participant Class.

2.28.7A. AEMO must grant an exemption from the requirement to register
as a Rule Participant in the Market Participant class for an application
received under clause 2.28.7 unless AEMO determines, in accordance with
the WEM Procedures specified in clauses 2.28.21 and 2.29.4N, that the
Facility must be registered for the purposes of Power System Security
and Power System Reliability, in which case, the relevant applicant
under clause 2.28.7 must register as a Rule Participant in the Market
Participant class and register the Facility in accordance with section
2.29.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.28.8 is amended to reflect the new registration framework
where any Facility containing an Energy Producing System with a System
Size of less than 5 MW will have a standing exemption from the
requirement to be registered. However, AEMO may revoke a standing
exemption for reasons of Power System Security and Power System
Reliability.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.28.8. Subject to clauses 2.28.8A and 2.28.8B, a person who intends to
own, control or operate a Facility with a System Size that is less than
5 MW and is or will be electrically connected to a transmission system
or distribution system which forms part of the South West Interconnected
System, or is electrically connected to that system is exempt from the
requirement to register as a Rule Participant in the Market Participant
class.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.28.8A is added to enable a person to choose to register in a
Rule Participant class in respect of a Facility with a System Size of
less than 5 MW.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.28.8A. A person who intends to own, control or operate a Facility with
a System Size that is less than 5 MW and is or will be electrically
connected to the South West Interconnected System may register as a
Market Participant.

2.28.8B. Clause 2.28.8 does not apply where:

\(a\) the Facility is required to be registered in a Facility Class in
accordance with section 2.29; or

\(b\) AEMO determines, in accordance with the WEM Procedure specified in
clause 2.29.4N, that the Facility must be registered for the purposes of
Power System Security and Power System Reliability.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.28.9 is deleted to reflect that there are no separate Market
Generator and Market Customer classes in the new registration
framework.</p>
<p>Replacement clause 2.28.9 provides that where AEMO does not grant an
exemption from the requirement to register in respect to a Facility less
than 10 MW, then the person who owns, operates or controls the Facility
must register in the Market Participant class.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.28.9. Where AEMO:

\(a\) does not grant an exemption in respect of an application made
under clause 2.28.7; or

\(b\) determines that a Facility must be registered in accordance with
clause 2.28.8B,

the person who owns, controls or operates the Facility must register as
a Rule Participant in the Market Participant class.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>New clause 2.28.9A requires that any person exempted from the
requirement to register that intends to make any modifications to its
Energy Producing System must notify AEMO. AEMO will then determine
whether the exemption from the requirement to register remains in
place.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.28.9A. Where a person who owns, controls or operates a Facility is
exempt, under clause 2.29.4B or clause 2.29.4C, from the requirement to
register the Facility and the person intends to make modifications to
its Facility, which are likely to increase the System Size of the
Facility or do not relate to routine maintenance or replacement of
equipment, the person must notify AEMO as soon as practicable and
provide details of the proposed modifications.

2.28.9B. Where AEMO receives a notification under clause 2.28.9A, AEMO
must reassess the exemption in accordance with the exemption criteria
and timeframes set out in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause
2.29.4N and AEMO must either:

\(a\) confirm the exemption remains valid; or

\(b\) revoke the exemption,

and notify the person who owns, controls or operates the Facility of the
outcome.

2.28.9BA. Where AEMO revokes an exemption under clause 2.28.9B(b), the
person who owns, controls or operates the relevant Facility must:

\(a\) register as a Rule Participant in the Market Participant class;
and

\(b\) register its Facility in the relevant Facility Class in accordance
with section 2.29.

2.28.9C. AEMO may, at any time, revoke an exemption granted pursuant to
clause 2.28.7A or clause 2.29.4B, if AEMO considers that the relevant
Facility no longer meets the exemption criteria for the relevant
exemption set out in the WEM Procedures referred to in clauses 2.28.21
and 2.29.4N.

2.28.10. Subject to clause 2.28.16, a person who sells electricity to
Contestable Customers in respect of Facilities electrically connected to
a transmission system or distribution system which forms part of the
South West Interconnected System, or is electrically connected to that
system, must register as a Rule Participant in the Market Participant
class.

2.28.11. A person who intends to sell electricity to Customers in
respect of Facilities electrically connected to a transmission system or
distribution system which forms part of the South West Interconnected
System, or is electrically connected to that system, may register as a
Rule Participant in the Market Participant class.

2.28.12. \[Blank\]

2.28.13. Subject to clauses 2.28.16 and 4.24.4, a person not covered by
clauses 2.28.2 to 2.28.11 but who sells or purchases electricity or
provides another electricity related service under these WEM Rules to or
from AEMO, including, without limitation, a person who intends to
provide or provides an Essential System Service, must register as a Rule
Participant in the Market Participant class.

2.28.14. \[Blank\]

2.28.15. \[Blank\]

2.28.15A. AEMO is a Rule Participant, but is not required to register,
and must not be registered in any other Rule Participant class.

2.28.16. AEMO may determine that a person is exempted from the
requirement to register in accordance with clauses 2.28.2, 2.28.6,
2.28.7, 2.28.10 or 2.28.13. An exemption may be given subject to any
conditions AEMO considers appropriate and may, upon prior reasonable
notice, be revoked at any time.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.28.16A is amended to:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>reverse the change made to clause 2.28.16A(a) in the Tranches 2
and 3 Amendments, because an Applicant should not always have to
nominate an Intermediary when seeking an exemption from the requirement
to register as a Rule Participant (e.g. when the reason for the
exemption is that the Applicant’s Facility does not need to be
registered); and</p></li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li><p>ensure an Applicant undertakes all necessary steps before
submitting a revocation notice under clause 2.28.16A(d), to ensure the
revocation of the Intermediary does not occur before the necessary steps
to replace it have been completed.</p></li>
</ul></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.28.16A. For the purposes of clause 2.28.16:

\(a\) a person (the “Applicant”) who applies to AEMO for an exemption
under clause 2.28.16 from the requirement to register may:

i\. notify AEMO of the identity of a person (an “**Intermediary**”) to
be registered instead of the Applicant; and

ii\. provide AEMO with the written consent of the Intermediary to act as
Intermediary in a form reasonably acceptable to AEMO;

\(b\) if an application for exemption made in accordance with clause
2.28.16A(a) is granted by AEMO in accordance with clause 2.28.16 then:

i\. provided the Intermediary satisfies all relevant registration
requirements that the Applicant would have been required to satisfy,
AEMO must register the Intermediary as a Rule Participant as if it were
the Applicant;

ii\. the Intermediary will be considered for the purposes of these WEM
Rules to be the Applicant;

iii\. all references in these WEM Rules to the Applicant will be deemed
to be references to the Intermediary (unless the context requires
otherwise);

iv\. all acts, omissions, statements, representations and notices of the
Intermediary in its capacity as the Rule Participant under these WEM
Rules will be deemed to be the acts, omissions, statements,
representations and notices of the Applicant;

v\. the Intermediary and the Applicant will be jointly and severally
liable for the acts, omissions, statements, representations and notices
of the Intermediary in its capacity as the Rule Participant under these
WEM Rules;

vi\. AEMO or any other Rule Participant may fulfil any obligations to
the Applicant under these WEM Rules by performing them in favour of the
Intermediary;

vii\. the Applicant must procure, and where necessary must facilitate,
the Intermediary’s compliance with its obligations under these WEM
Rules, including any obligations that, but for the exemption, would be
placed on the Applicant; and

viii\. the Applicant must, where necessary, participate in and abide by
the outcome of any dispute process under sections 2.18 to 2.20;

\(c\) for the purposes of enforcing clauses 2.28.16A(b)(vii) and (viii),
a reference in these WEM Rules to “Rule Participant” includes the
Applicant;

\(d\) the Applicant may revoke the appointment of the Intermediary by
giving notice of the revocation to AEMO and, prior to giving such notice
to AEMO:

i\. where the Applicant wishes to appoint a replacement Intermediary:

1\. providing the notices referred to in clauses 2.28.16A(a)(i) and
2.28.16A(a)(ii) to AEMO;

2\. obtaining AEMO's consent to be exempted from registration in
accordance with clause 2.28.16;

3\. ensuring that all relevant Registered Facilities or Intermittent
Loads that were registered to the current Intermediary have been
transferred to the replacement Intermediary; and

4\. ensuring that the replacement Intermediary has notified AEMO of the
change of circumstances for Credit Limit determination purposes in
accordance with clause 2.37.8; or

ii\. where clause 2.28.16A(d)(i) does not apply:

1\. registering as a Rule Participant in the Market Participant class;

2\. ensuring that all relevant Registered Facilities or Intermittent
Loads that were registered to the current Intermediary have been
transferred to the Applicant; and

3\. notifying AEMO of the change of circumstances for Credit Limit
determination purposes in accordance with clause 2.37.8;

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.28.16A(e) has been modified to refer to 8:00 AM as a notice
of revocation and the transfer of any Registered Facilities can only be
effected at the start of a Trading Day. AEMO's systems cannot effect a
transfer at 4:30 AM as per the previous requirement.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

\(e\) at 8:00 AM, 2 Business Days after AEMO receives notice of the
revocation of the appointment of an Intermediary in accordance with
clauses 2.28.16A(d)(i) or 2.28.16A(d)(ii), the Intermediary will cease
to be considered the Applicant’s Intermediary for the purposes of these
WEM Rules and the Applicant will not be liable under clause
2.28.16A(b)(v) for any acts, omissions, statements, representations or
notices of the Intermediary occurring after that time;

\(f\) if the Applicant revokes the appointment of an Intermediary, the
exemption granted by AEMO to the Applicant as contemplated by clause
2.28.16A(b) ceases at the time the Intermediary ceases to be the
Applicant’s Intermediary in accordance with clause 2.28.16A(e); and

\(g\) AEMO may permit the Applicant to designate the Intermediary as the
Applicant’s Intermediary with respect to one or more Facilities which
the Applicant owns, operates or controls.

2.28.16B. Without limiting the generality and the operation of clause
2.28.16, AEMO may exempt under clause 2.18.16 a person who owns,
controls or operates a generation system which has a rated capacity that
equals or exceeds 10 MW and is electrically connected to a transmission
system or distribution system which forms part of the South West
Interconnected System, or is electrically connected to that system, from
the requirement to register as a Rule Participant in the Market
Participant class, in respect of that generation system, where all of
the following are satisfied:

\(a\) positive MWh quantities measured by the interval meter or meters
associated with that generation system are not reasonably expected to
exceed 5 MWh in any Trading Interval;

\(b\) negative MWh quantities measured by the interval meter or meters
associated with that generation system are not reasonably expected to
increase by more than 5 MWh in any Trading Interval in the event of an
outage of that generating system;

\(c\) AEMO has determined that it does not require information about the
relevant generation system to ensure Power System Security and Power
System Reliability are maintained;

\(d\) the meter or meters measuring the generation system remains
registered by an existing Market Participant; and

\(e\) AEMO determines that with the exemption the cumulative effect of
all exemptions given under this clause 2.28.16B is consistent with the
Wholesale Market Objectives,

and AEMO may give the exemption subject to any conditions AEMO considers
appropriate and may revoke the exemption if AEMO determines that any of
these conditions, or any of the conditions in this clause 2.28.16B,
ceases to be satisfied.

2.28.16C. Where AEMO is reasonably satisfied the requirements of clause
2.30B.8B have been met, AEMO must exempt a person who owns, controls or
operates a Facility containing an Intermittent Load from the requirement
to register as a Rule Participant.

2.28.17. A Rule Participant under these WEM Rules is a participant for
the purposes of section 121(2) of the Electricity Industry Act.

2.28.18. \[Blank\]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.28.19 is amended to reflect changes made in March 2017 to
the Corporations Act, which removed the definition of
‘externally-administered body corporate’.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.28.19. Any person intending to register as a Rule Participant or who
is registered as a Rule Participant must:

\(a\) be resident in, or have permanent establishment in, Australia;

\(b\) not be a Chapter 5 body corporate (as defined in the Corporations
Act), or under a similar form of administration under any laws
applicable to it in any jurisdiction;

\(c\) not have immunity from suit in respect of the obligations of a
Rule Participant under these WEM Rules; and

\(d\) be capable of being sued in its own name in a court of Australia.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.28.20 is a modified version of clause 2.28.3A which is
relocated to the end of section 2.29.</p>
<p>AEMO will be required to develop a new WEM Procedure (or amend the
existing WEM Procedure) that sets out the exemption criteria for the
requirement to register as a Market Participant or a Facility in a
Facility Class. This WEM Procedure will also outline the processes that
are to be followed by both AEMO and Market Participants in applying for,
assessing, granting and revoking an exemption.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.28.20. AEMO must document the following in a WEM Procedure:

\(a\) information that a Network Operator must provide to AEMO, for each
of its Networks, including:

i\. positive, negative and zero sequence network impedances for the
network elements;

ii\. information on the network topology;

iii\. information on transmission circuit limits;

iv\. information on security constraints;

v\. overload ratings, including details of how long overload ratings can
be maintained; and

vi\. the short circuit capability of facility equipment;

\(b\) the processes to be followed by a Network Operator to enable AEMO
to access the information specified in clause 2.28.20(a);

\(c\) technical and communication criteria that a Network Operator must
meet with respect to AEMO’s ability to access the information specified
in clause 2.28.20(a); and

\(d\) the processes to be followed by AEMO when accessing the
information specified in clause 2.28.20(a).

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.28.21(b) is amended to replace “Market Participant” with
“person”, because an applicant for exemption in respect of Rule
Participant registration is not always (and is in practice quite
unlikely to be) a Market Participant.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.28.21. AEMO must document the following in a WEM Procedure:

\(a\) the criteria AEMO will use to determine whether or not to exempt
persons from Rule Participant registration requirements in sections 2.28
and 2.30B, which must include assessment criteria for AEMO to ensure
that granting an exemption from the requirement to register does not
adversely affect Power System Security or Power System Reliability;

\(b\) the processes to be followed by a person in applying for an
exemption in respect of Rule Participant registration under sections
2.28 and 2.30B; and

\(c\) the processes to be followed and criteria to be applied by AEMO in
assessing, determining or revoking an exemption in respect of Rule
Participant registration under sections 2.28 and 2.30B.

2.29. Facility Registration Classes

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.29.1 outlines the types of technology that may exist in the
WEM. Clause 2.29.1A outlines the Facility Classes for the purposes of
registration in the WEM.</p>
<p>A Facility may contain one or more technology types (however they may
be limited by rules related to facility aggregation and requirement to
be at a single network connection point). The determination of Facility
Class will be made by AEMO in accordance with the registration
process.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.29.1. The Facility Technology Types are:

\(a\) a distribution system;

\(b\) a transmission system;

\(c\) an Intermittent Generating System;

\(d\) a Non-Intermittent Generating System;

\(e\) an Electric Storage Resource; and

\(f\) a Load.

2.29.1A. The Facility Classes are:

\(a\) a Network;

\(b\) a Scheduled Facility;

\(c\) a Semi-Scheduled Facility;

\(d\) a Non-Scheduled Facility;

\(e\) an Interruptible Load; and

\(f\) a Demand Side Programme.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.29.1B defined the term 'Facility' for the purposes of the
WEM Rules. This clause outlines what a Facility may consist of and
clarifies the object which is being assessed for the purposes of Reserve
Capacity certification, registration application, de-registration or
registration exemption. The term 'Facility' may refer to an unregistered
Facility or Registered Facility.</p>
<p>Clause 2.29.1B identifies the different types of facilities captured
under the WEM Rules. Note these facilities are not necessarily required
to be registered (example transmission and distribution system are not
separately registered under WEM Rules), they have obligations placed on
them in the WEM Rules and certain facilities may register into Facility
Classes as defined in clause 2.29.1A</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.29.1B. The following are Facilities for the purposes of these WEM
Rules:

\(a\) a transmission system;

\(b\) a distribution system;

\(c\) all Facility Technology Types that are connected behind a single
network connection point or electrically connected behind two or more
shared network connection points;

\(d\) one or more Facilities described in clause 2.29.1B(c), aggregated
under section 2.30 at an Electrical Location;

\(e\) a Small Aggregation;

\(f\) a Demand Side Programme; or

\(g\) an Interruptible Load.

2.29.1C. AEMO's determination of a Facility Class under this section
2.29 is final.

2.29.2. Subject to clause 2.29.2A, no Facilities registered in one
Facility Class can simultaneously be registered in another Facility
Class.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.29.2A provides an explicit exemption in the WEM Rules that
may enable Market Participants to register a DSP or Interruptible Load
at a common set of network connection points to another Registered
Facility.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.29.2A. Notwithstanding clause 2.29.2, AEMO may allow registration of a
Demand Side Programme and Interruptible Load at a common set of network
connection points provided that:

\(a\) the Demand Side Programme and the Interruptible Load are
registered to the same Market Participant; or

\(b\) the Market Participant for the Demand Side Programme and the
Interruptible Load each provide evidence that their Facility is capable
of meeting the obligations under clause 7.4.10.

2.29.3. Subject to clause 2.29.4M, a Network Operator must register any
transmission system or distribution system owned, operated or controlled
by that Network Operator as a Network, where that transmission or
distribution system forms part of the South West Interconnected System,
or is electrically connected to that system.

2.29.4. Subject to clauses 2.29.4M and 2.30B.8D, a person who owns,
controls or operates a Facility containing an Energy Producing System
with a System Size that equals or exceeds 10 MW and is electrically
connected to a transmission system or distribution system which forms
part of the South West Interconnected System, or is electrically
connected to that system, must register the Facility as a Semi-Scheduled
Facility or a Scheduled Facility.

2.29.4A. A person that owns, controls or operates a Facility containing
an Energy Producing System with a System Size of less than 10 MW, but
which equals or exceeds 5 MW, and is electrically connected to a
transmission system or distribution system which forms part of the South
West Interconnected System, or is electrically connected to that system,
must apply to AEMO for an exemption from the requirement to register the
Facility in a Facility Class where the person is not intending to
register the Facility in a Facility Class.

2.29.4B. Where AEMO receives an application under clause 2.29.4A, AEMO
must grant an exemption from the requirement to register the Facility in
a Facility Class unless AEMO determines, in accordance with the WEM
Procedure specified in clause 2.29.4N, that the Facility must be
registered in a Facility Class for the purposes of Power System Security
and Power System Reliability.

2.29.4C. Subject to clause 2.29.4E, a person who intends to own, control
or operate a Facility with a System Size that is less than 5 MW and is
or will be electrically connected to a transmission system or
distribution system which forms part of the South West Interconnected
System, or is electrically connected to that system, is exempted from
the requirement to register the Facility in a Facility Class.

2.29.4D. Clause 2.29.4C does not apply where AEMO determines, in
accordance with the WEM Procedure specified in clause 2.29.4N, that a
Facility, containing an Energy Producing System, must be registered in a
Facility Class for the purposes of Power System Security and Power
System Reliability.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.29.4E provides AEMO with a head of power to register a
Facility with a System Size of less than 5 MW in a Facility
Class.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.29.4E. A person who intends to own, control or operate a Facility with
a System Size that is less than 5 MW, and is or will be electrically
connected to the South West Interconnected System may apply to AEMO to
register the Facility in a Facility Class.

2.29.4F. Where AEMO:

\(a\) does not grant an exemption in respect to an application made
under clause 2.29.4A; or

\(b\) determines that the Facility must be registered in accordance with
clause 2.29.4D,

the person who owns, controls or operates the Facility must register the
Facility in a Facility Class.

2.29.4G. A person that owns, operates or controls a Facility with a
System Size that is less than 10 MW may request the Facility to be
registered as a Non-Scheduled Facility, a Scheduled Facility or a
Semi-Scheduled Facility.

2.29.4H. AEMO must grant a request by a person that owns, operates or
controls a Facility containing an Energy Producing System with a System
Size less than 10 MW to register the Facility as a Non-Scheduled
Facility, unless AEMO determines the Facility must be controllable for
the purposes of Power System Security and Power System Reliability in
accordance with the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.29.4N.

2.29.4I. If AEMO determines that a Facility containing an Energy
Producing System must be controllable for the purposes of Power System
Security and Power System Reliability, in accordance with the WEM
Procedure pursuant to 2.29.4N or if a person requests to register their
Facility as a Scheduled Facility or a Semi-Scheduled Facility under
clause 2.29.4G, then AEMO must register the relevant Facility as either
a Scheduled Facility or a Semi-Scheduled Facility in accordance with
clause 2.29.4K and the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.29.4N.

2.29.4J. AEMO must not register a Facility with a System Size greater
than or equal to 10 MW as a Non-Scheduled Facility.

2.29.4K. In determining whether a Facility should be registered as a
Scheduled Facility or a Semi-Scheduled Facility, AEMO must take into
account the extent to which the relevant Facility is controllable as
follows:

\(a\) a Scheduled Facility must be able to respond to a Dispatch Target
from AEMO such that it can maintain its Injection or Withdrawal within
its Tolerance Range for a specified period; and

\(b\) a Semi-Scheduled Facility must be able to reduce the value of its
Injection or increase the value of its Withdrawal to comply with a
Dispatch Cap issued by AEMO.

2.29.4L. Where AEMO reasonably considers that further information is
required to enable it to make a determination under clause 2.29.4K, AEMO
may request the information from the relevant Market Participant and the
Market Participant must provide the information to AEMO by the time
specified in the request, which must not be less than 15 Business Days
of receipt of AEMO's request. AEMO may extend the time specified in a
request if it considers it is reasonably necessary to do so.

2.29.4M. AEMO may determine that a person is exempted from the
requirement to register a Facility in accordance with this section 2.29.
An exemption may be given subject to any conditions that AEMO considers
appropriate.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.29.4N requires AEMO to develop a WEM Procedure on how AEMO
determines a Facility’s controllability based on how reliably a Facility
can follow AEMO’s Dispatch Instructions.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.29.4N. AEMO must document in a WEM Procedure:

\(a\) the process AEMO will follow to assess a Facility’s
controllability where that assessment must take into account:

i\. the controllability requirements specified for a Scheduled Facility
and a Semi-Scheduled Facility in clause 2.29.4K;

ii\. how reliably a Facility can follow Dispatch Instructions within its
Tolerance Range; and

iii\. any other information provided by a Market Participant, in
response to a request by AEMO or otherwise, that supports the assessment
of the Facility’s controllability;

\(b\) the criteria AEMO will use to determine whether or not to exempt a
Facility from Facility registration requirements in this section 2.29,
which must include assessment criteria for AEMO to ensure that granting
an exemption from the requirement to register does not adversely affect
Power System Security or Power System Reliability;

\(c\) the processes to be followed by a Market Participant in applying
for an exemption from the requirement to register a Facility under this
section 2.29; and

\(d\) the processes to be followed and criteria to be applied by AEMO in
assessing, determining or revoking an exemption in respect of Facility
registration under this section 2.29 and section 2.30B; and

\(e\) the processes to be followed in relation to applications for
Intermittent Loads and the provision of data to AEMO under section
2.30B.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>A new heading has been added to segregate clauses relating to
Non-Dispatchable Loads and the association and disassociation process
with Demand Side Programmes.</p>
<p>The relevant clauses have been updated to include Interruptible
Loads.</p>
<p>Clause 2.29.5N provides AEMO with the head of power to outline the
process to associate and disassociate a Non-Dispatchable Load with
Demand Side Programmes and Interruptible Loads in a WEM
Procedure.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

Non-Dispatchable Loads and the association and disassociation with
Demand Side Programmes and Interruptible Loads

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>New clause 2.29.5 is similar to clause 2.29.5A so that a Market
Participant, other than the Financially Responsible Market Participant,
can aggregate loads to register Interruptible Loads.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.29.5. A Market Participant that owns, operates or controls a
Non-dispatchable Load or:

\(a\) has entered into; or

\(b\) intends to enter into,

a contract with a person who owns, controls or operates a
Non-Dispatchable Load, for the Load to be interrupted in response to
under frequency situations may register an Interruptible Load.

2.29.5A. A Market Participant that owns, operates or controls a
Non-Dispatchable Load or:

\(a\) has entered into; or

\(b\) intends to enter into,

a contract with a person who owns, controls or operates a
Non-Dispatchable Load, for the Load to provide curtailment (on request
if relevant) by the Market Participant, may register a Demand Side
Programme.

2.29.5AA. A Market Participant that owns, controls or operates a
Facility containing a Load may register the Facility as a Scheduled
Facility if AEMO determines that the Facility meets the controllability
requirements outlined in the WEM Procedure specified in clause 2.29.4N.

2.29.5B. A Market Participant may apply to AEMO to associate a
Non-Dispatchable Load with a Demand Side Programme or an Interruptible
Load. The Market Participant must provide the following information to
AEMO in support of the application:

\(a\) if applicable, evidence satisfactory to AEMO that the Market
Participant owns the Non-Dispatchable Load or has entered into a
contract with the person who owns, operates or controls the
Non-Dispatchable Load to provide curtailment on request by the Market
Participant;

\(b\) the network connection point of the Non-Dispatchable Load;

(bA) the Transmission Node Identifier for the Non-Dispatchable Load;

\(c\) the expected Minimum Consumption of the Non-Dispatchable Load in
units of MW;

\(d\) if the Market Participant requesting the association owns,
controls or operates the relevant Non-Dispatchable Load, then the start
date and end date of the Non-Dispatchable Load association proposed by
the Market Participant; and

\(e\) if the Market Participant requesting the association has entered
into a contract with a person who owns, controls or operates the
relevant Non-Dispatchable Load, then the contract start date and
contract end date.

2.29.5C. AEMO must within one Business Day notify an applicant of the
receipt of the application submitted under clause 2.29.5B. AEMO may, at
its discretion, require that an applicant provide information that is
missing from the application or is inadequately specified. The date the
requested information is submitted to AEMO will become the date of
receipt of the application.

2.29.5CA. Where an applicant receives a request for information from
AEMO under clause 2.29.5C and does not provide the information to AEMO
within 20 Business Days from the date of AEMO's request, the applicant
will be deemed to have withdrawn the application.

2.29.5D. AEMO must determine, in accordance with clause 2.29.5E, whether
to accept or reject an application submitted under clause 2.29.5B, and
must notify the applicant of its decision within 10 Business Days of
receipt of the application.

2.29.5E. AEMO must accept an application submitted under clause 2.29.5B
unless:

\(a\) AEMO considers that the evidence provided by the Market
Participant under clauses 2.29.5B and 2.29.5C is not satisfactory;

\(b\) the relevant Non-Dispatchable Load is not equipped with interval
metering;

\(c\) \[Blank\]

\(d\) for an application relating to a Demand Side Programme, the
relevant Non-Dispatchable Load is registered as an Intermittent Load for
any part of the proposed Association Period;

\(e\) subject to clause 2.29.2A, the relevant Non-Dispatchable Load is
already associated with a Demand Side Programme or an Interruptible Load
registered to a different Market Participant for any part of the
proposed Association Period;

\(f\) during the same Capacity Year, the relevant Non-Dispatchable Load
was an Associated Load of another Demand Side Programme and, while it
was so associated:

i\. the other Demand Side Programme passed a Reserve Capacity Test or a
Verification Test; or

ii\. any part of DSM Reserve Capacity Security associated with the other
Demand Side Programme was returned or relinquished under:

1\. clause 4.13A.19 by operation of clause 4.13A.18; or

2\. clause 4.13A.24; or

\(g\) the Transmission Node Identifier for the relevant Non-Dispatchable
Load does not match the single Transmission Node Identifier for the
Demand Side Programme.

2.29.5F. If AEMO accepts an application in accordance with clause
2.29.5D then AEMO must include in its notification to the applicant:

\(a\) the date and time from which the relevant Non-Dispatchable Load
will be associated with the Demand Side Programme or Interruptible Load,
as applicable, as defined under clause 2.29.5G(a); and

\(b\) the date and time from which the relevant Non-Dispatchable Load
will cease to be associated with the Demand Side Programme or
Interruptible Load, as applicable, as defined under clause 2.29.5G(b).

2.29.5G If AEMO accepts an application submitted under clause 2.29.5B
then AEMO must associate the relevant Non-Dispatchable Load
(“**Associated Load**”) with the Demand Side Programme or Interruptible
Load, as applicable, for the period (“**Association Period**”) between:

\(a\) the start date, which is the latest of:

i\. if the Market Participant making the application owns, controls or
operates the relevant Non-Dispatchable Load, the start of the Trading
Day commencing on the start date provided under clause 2.29.5B(d); or

ii\. if the Market Participant making the application has entered into
contract with the person who owns, controls or operates the relevant
Non-Dispatchable Load, the contract start date provided under clause
2.29.5B(e); or

iii\. the start of the Trading Day following the day that AEMO notifies
the applicant of its decision under clause 2.29.5D to accept the
application submitted under clause 2.29.5B; and

\(b\) the end date is:

i\. if the Market Participant making the application owns, controls or
operates the relevant Non-Dispatchable Load, the end of the Trading Day
for the end date provided under clause 2.29.5B(d); or

ii\. if the Market Participant making the application has entered into a
contract with the person who owns, controls or operates the relevant
Non-Dispatchable Load, the end of the Trading Day for the contract end
date provided under clause 2.29.5B(e).

2.29.5H. If AEMO rejects an application submitted under clause 2.29.5B,
then AEMO must include in its notification to the applicant under clause
2.29.5D the reasons for the rejection of the application. A Market
Participant whose application is rejected may reapply to associate a
Non-Dispatchable Load with a Demand Side Programme or Interruptible
Load, as applicable, under clause 2.29.5B.

2.29.5I. A Market Participant with an Associated Load may apply to AEMO
to:

\(a\) cancel the association of the relevant Non-Dispatchable Load with
the Demand Side Programme or Interruptible Load, as applicable; or

\(b\) reduce the Association Period of the Associated Load.

2.29.5J. AEMO must within one Business Day notify an applicant of the
receipt of an application submitted under clause 2.29.5I.

2.29.5K. AEMO must determine whether to accept or reject an application
submitted under clause 2.29.5I and notify the applicant of its decision
within two Business Days of the receipt of the application. AEMO must
accept the application unless the proposed change would affect the
association of the relevant Non-Dispatchable Load with the Demand Side
Programme or Interruptible Load, as applicable, during any period before
the Trading Day commencing on the third Business Day after the receipt
of the application.

2.29.5L. If AEMO accepts an application submitted under clause 2.29.5I
then it must either:

\(a\) cancel the association of the relevant Non-Dispatchable Load with
the Demand Side Programme or Interruptible Load, as applicable; or

\(b\) reduce the Association Period of the Associated Load,

as requested in the application.

2.29.5LA. If AEMO becomes aware that information of the type listed in
clause 2.29.5B regarding an Associated Load differs from that provided
under clause 2.29.5B or previously the subject of a redetermination
under this clause 2.29.5LA (“**New Information**”), then AEMO must make
a fresh determination under clause 2.29.5D taking into account the New
Information, as a result of which AEMO must, as appropriate:

\(a\) reduce the Associated Load's Association Period; or

\(b\) take other measures in respect of the Associated Load including
cancelling its association; or

\(c\) make no change to its previous determination or redetermination.

2.29.5LB. AEMO may from time to time request a Market Participant with a
Demand Side Programme or Interruptible Load to provide evidence to
AEMO's reasonable satisfaction that information provided under clause
2.29.5B or previously the subject of an adjustment under clause
2.29.5LA, remains accurate, and the Market Participant must comply as
soon as reasonably practicable and in any event within 10 Business Days
of the request.

2.29.5LC. If AEMO takes action under clause 2.29.5LA(a) or clause
2.29.5LA(b), it must notify the Market Participant of the action and its
reasons within five Business Days after the action.

2.29.5M. If AEMO rejects an application submitted under clause 2.29.5I,
then AEMO must include in its notification to the applicant under clause
2.29.5K the reasons for the rejection of the application.

2.29.5N. AEMO must document in a WEM Procedure:

\(a\) the process to be followed by a Market Participant and the
information to be provided to AEMO for an application to associate,
disassociate or reduce the Association Period of a Non-Dispatchable Load
with a Demand Side Programme or an Interruptible Load under clauses
2.29.5B and 2.29.5I; and

\(b\) the process to be followed by AEMO in respect to accepting or
rejecting an application to associate, disassociate or reduce the
Association Period of a Non-Dispatchable Load with a Demand Side
Programme or an Interruptible Load under clauses 2.29.5B and 2.29.5I.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>To support the Taskforce design decision to incorporate a lifecycle
approach to registration, Market Participants will be required to notify
AEMO whenever the configuration of their Facility changes as this may
affect the classification of the Facility.</p>
<p>Under the new arrangements registration will need to be an ongoing
process from Facility creation to deregistration. This is to ensure that
AEMO has the information required to inform scheduling and dispatch
while maintaining system security, and that necessary obligations apply
to a Facility through the operation of the WEM Rules.</p>
<p>New provisions have been incorporated to outline the Facility Class
reassessment process to be followed by Market Participants and AEMO.</p>
<p>Clause 2.29.6 outlines the process under the WEM Rules by which a
Market Participant may trigger a Facility Class reassessment request for
a Registered Facility.</p>
<p>The scope of clauses 2.29.6 excludes Demand Side Programmes and
Interruptible Loads, as Facilities registered in these Facility Classes
are not subject to the reclassification if the configuration of their
Facility changes. Instead, for Demand Side Programmes and Interruptible
Loads, a Market Participant or AEMO may trigger the Load association and
or the disassociation process in accordance with clause 2.29.5 and
changes to the configuration of an Interruptible Load will require ESS
re-accreditation.</p>
<p>Requirements have also been updated in sections 2.31 and 2.33 to
incorporate the Facility Class reassessment process initiated by a
Market Participant and the required application form.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.29.6. A Market Participant must submit an application in accordance
with clause 2.33.8 for a Facility Class reassessment on becoming aware
that:

\(a\) the System Size of its Non-Scheduled Facility is or will be
greater than 10 MW; or

\(b\) the Facility Class that the Facility is registered in does not
reflect the Facility’s controllability.

2.29.7. AEMO must process a Facility Class reassessment application it
receives in accordance with section 2.31.

2.29.7A. AEMO may from time to time conduct a review to assess whether a
Registered Facility continues to meet the obligations under these WEM
Rules and WEM Procedures for the Facility Class in which it is
registered.

2.29.8. Where AEMO considers that a Facility no longer meets the
requirements of the Facility Class it is registered in, AEMO may
register the Facility in a different Facility Class.

2.29.9. AEMO must document in a WEM Procedure:

\(a\) the processes AEMO will use to:

i\. determine whether a Facility should be assigned to a different
Facility Class; and

ii\. assign a Facility to a different Facility Class; and

\(b\) the processes a Market Participant must follow where:

i\. the Market Participant provides information to AEMO under clause
2.29.6; or

ii\. AEMO notifies the Market Participant of its intention to assess
whether the Facility continues to meet the requirements of the Facility
Class in which it is registered.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.29.10 has been replaced by a similar clause in section
2.30B.</p>
<p>Clause 2.29.11 is deleted, as the requirements for Energy Producing
Systems serving Intermittent Loads are now covered in section
2.30B.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.29.10 \[Blank\]

2.29.11 \[Blank\]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Electric Storage Resources co-located with a Scheduled Facility or
Semi-Scheduled Facility must have separate metering installed for the
purposes of Reserve Capacity certification and testing.</p>
<p>Subsequent amendments clarify that the requirement extends to
Facilities where certification of Reserve Capacity for only one
component is sought.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.29.12. A Market Participant must install Facility Sub-Metering for a
Scheduled Facility or Semi-Scheduled Facility containing:

\(a\) multiple Separately Certified Components; or

\(b\) a single Separately Certified Component and any Energy Producing
Systems that are not that Separately Certified Components.

2.29.13. Facility Sub-Metering is to be used solely for the purpose of:

\(a\) certification of Reserve Capacity under section 4.9;

\(b\) a Reserve Capacity Test under section 4.25; and

\(c\) in accordance with clause 4.13.10B, the determination of whether a
Facility is in Commercial Operation.

To avoid doubt, Facility Sub-Metering must not be used for the purposes
of settlement under Chapter 9.

2.29.14. Facility Sub-Metering must comply with the requirements
specified in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.29.15.

2.29.15. AEMO must document the following matters in respect of Facility
Sub-Metering in a WEM Procedure:

\(a\) the characteristics and requirements of Facility Sub-Metering,
including accuracy requirements;

\(b\) the procedures to be followed by Market Participants for auditing
of Facility Sub-Metering;

\(c\) the communication requirements and protocols between a relevant
Market Participant and AEMO;

\(d\) the processes to be followed by a Market Participant for providing
Facility Sub-Metering information to AEMO; and

\(e\) any other matters which AEMO considers relevant.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clauses 2.29.1B(c) and (d) define a Facility to be one or more
Facility Technology Types behind a network connection point, or an
aggregation of the former.</p>
<p>The scope of section 2.30 therefore only covers the aggregation of
Facilities contemplated under clause 2.29.1B(c). However, the existing
section makes generic reference to the term Facility, which according to
amended clause 2.29.1B also includes Demand Side Programmes and Small
Aggregations.</p>
<p>See related change above to clause 2.29.1B to include Interruptible
Loads so that it is clear that section 2.30 also excludes the
aggregation of Interruptible Loads which (like DSPs) undergo a load
association process.</p>
<p>Section 2.30 clarifies the aggregation process and timelines.
Currently sections 2.31 to 2.33 excludes facility
aggregation/disaggregation. While a head of power for an
aggregation/disaggregation WEM Procedure exists, amendments to sections
2.31 to 2.33 to include aggregation/disaggregation , so thatwill make it
clear that the requirements in section 2.30 are effected through the
process set out in section 2.31.</p>
<p>Minor change to clause 2.30.1 to indicate that aggregation requests
can come in at any time - not just when an unregistered Facility is
being registered. A participant may choose to aggregate two or more
Registered Facilities.</p>
<p>Clause 2.30.2 has been deleted as a provision to aggregate
intermittent generation equipment which inject energy at a common
network connection point to become a single Facility is no longer
required. This has been superseded by the definition of a Facility in
clause 2.29.1B(c) which achieves the same outcome.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.30. Facility Aggregation

2.30.1. A Rule Participant, or an applicant for rule participation, may
apply to AEMO to allow the registration of an Aggregated Facility.

2.30.1A. For each Capacity Year AEMO may only accept an application
under clause 2.30.1 once with respect to each Facility.

2.30.2. \[Blank\]

2.30.3. \[Blank\]

2.30.4. AEMO must consult with the relevant Network Operator when
assessing an application for Facility aggregation and inform the
relevant Rule Participant whether the aggregation of the facilities is
allowed.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.30.5(c) is a consequential amendment as a result of the new
Essential System Services framework, which does not use the term
‘Ancillary Service Contract’.</p>
<p>Clause 2.30.5(f) precludes AEMO from aggregating, or allowing to
continue to be aggregated, Facilities where the price for Reserve
Capacity to be provided by those Facilities is not, or is not expected
to be, the same.</p>
<p>Section 3.1.1 of the Energy Scheduling and Dispatch Information paper
sets out the criteria that AEMO must apply when approving the
aggregation of Facilities, so that the locational dispatch and
co-optimisation of ESS envisaged by the SCED reforms can be
effected.</p>
<p>Paragraph (g) of clause 2.30.5 represents this intent, and is
intended to convey the following:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>AEMO cannot approve an aggregation that would lead to the
over-procurement of Contingency Reserve Raise ESS as a result of
reflecting the output of the Aggregated Facility as the contingency (in
the relevant ESS constraint) in SCED when the credible contingency is
the individual loss of each component Facility. This is not an issue
when the aggregation is so small, that the impact on Contingency Reserve
Raise ESS procurement is negligible or nil.</p></li>
<li><p>AEMO cannot approve an aggregation where the Aggregated Facility
would be providing ESS, and the ESS capability (ESS trapezium) cannot be
accurately depicted for the Aggregated Facility in its entirety. It
should be noted the Facility capable of providing ESS, must offer its
ESS quantity at its connection points for the whole Facility, not at the
Facility’s sub-component level.</p></li>
<li><p>AEMO may only aggregate Facilities if the proposed Aggregated
Facility are at the same Electrical Location. Figure 1 and Figure 2
below illustrate configurations in which aggregation is allowed and not
allowed.</p></li>
</ul>
<p>Figure 1 – Aggregation is allowed as Facilities are located at the
same Electrical Location<img src="media/image1.png"
style="width:5.73958in;height:3.29444in" /></p>
<p>Figure 2 - Aggregation is not allowed as Facilities are located at
Different Electrical Locations.</p>
<p><img src="media/image2.png"
style="width:5.95583in;height:3.91667in" /></p>
<p>In addition, clause 2.30.5 (b) has been amended slightly to clarify
the fact that:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>The aggregation may comprise both registered and unregistered
Facilities; and</p></li>
<li><p>AEMO may require Standing Data in respect of the aggregation as
opposed to just the individual Facilities comprising the
aggregation.</p></li>
</ul></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.30.5. AEMO must only allow the aggregation of Facilities pursuant to
an application under clause 2.30.1 if, in its opinion, the proposed
Aggregated Facility meets the following criteria:

\(a\) the proposed Aggregated Facility will not adversely impact on
AEMO's ability to ensure Power System Security and Power System
Reliability are maintained;

\(b\) the Market Participant for the proposed Aggregated Facility
provides Standing Data for:

i\. each individual Facility that would be required to be provided if
each Facility was registered separately; and

ii\. the Aggregated Facility as a whole;

\(c\) adequate control and monitoring equipment exists for the proposed
Aggregated Facility; and

\(d\) the Facilities within the proposed Aggregated Facility are at the
same Electrical Location;

\(e\) \[Blank\]

\(f\) the Facility Monthly Reserve Capacity Price applicable to each of
the Facilities within the proposed Aggregated Facility is the same, and
is expected to remain the same, from and including the current Reserve
Capacity Cycle;

\(g\) either:

i\. the System Size of the proposed Aggregated Facility as determined by
AEMO will not affect the quantity of Frequency Co-optimised Essential
Services required to be dispatched; or

ii\. the Facility Contingency associated with the proposed Aggregated
Facility affects each individual Facility in the proposed aggregation
simultaneously;

\(h\) if the proposed Aggregated Facility intends to provide Frequency
Co-optimised Essential System Services, the capability to simultaneously
provide energy and Frequency Co-optimised Essential Services from the
individual Facilities in the proposed aggregation can be adequately
derived for the proposed Aggregated Facility; and

\(i\) the Aggregated Facility will be registered as a Scheduled
Facility, Semi-Scheduled Facility or a Non-Scheduled Facility.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>As noted in the Explanatory Note at section 2.29, in the new market,
AEMO requires a head of power to force aggregation on Facilities where
the Credible Contingency is simultaneous loss of multiple Facilities
(for example, a CCGT with the gas and steam turbines behind separate
connection points). A new clause is required for a Market Participant
responsible for the Facilities to apply to AEMO for the Facilities to
become an Aggregated Facility.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.30.5A. If a single Credible Contingency Event other than a Network
Contingency would result in the disconnection of two or more Facilities,
then the Market Participant responsible for each of the Facilities must
apply to AEMO to aggregate the relevant Facilities into an Aggregated
Facility.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>In the current market, there are Registered Facilities which have
auxiliary load that is located in a manner that does not enable a
sent-out value for the relevant Facility to be calculated. While this is
currently manageable (due to the small amount of auxiliary load not
affecting capacity assignment, or AEMO’s ability to create a synthetic
sent out value), in future, pursuant to clause 2.30.5C, Facilities which
contain auxiliary load at a separate network connection point will be
required to aggregate to ensure a sent out value exists for the
Facility.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.30.5B. If two or more Facilities are electrically connected behind
multiple connection points, such that one or more of those Facilities
could Inject into or Withdraw from the Network at more than one of the
network connection points, and one or more of the Facilities is
registered or AEMO has received an application to register one or more
of the Facilities, then AEMO must aggregate the relevant Facilities into
an Aggregated Facility.

2.30.5C. Subject to clause 2.30.5D, if a Facility containing an Energy
Producing System with a System Size that equals or exceeds 10 MW has a
Parasitic Load which is located at a network connection point other than
the network connection point at which the Energy Producing System is
located, then AEMO may require the Market Participant for the relevant
Facilities to apply to aggregate the Facilities into an Aggregated
Facility under clause 2.30.1.

2.30.5D. Where AEMO considers that clauses 2.30.5A, 2.30.5B or 2.30.5C
apply to an application for registration of a Facility under section
2.29, AEMO must notify the relevant Market Participant of the
requirement to register the Facilities as an Aggregated Facility.

2.30.6. If the individual Facilities forming part of an Aggregated
Facility have their own meters, and there is no single meter for the
entire Aggregated Facility, then the settlement meter data for the
Aggregated Facility must be the sum of the meter readings for its
component Facilities for the purposes of clause 9.5.1.is taken to be
treated as a single Facility for the purpose of these WEM Rules.

2.30.7. If AEMO approves the aggregation of Facilities then, that
Aggregated Facility must be registered as a single Facility for the
purpose of these WEM Rules, and the aggregation will take effect from
the date of that registration.

2.30.8. Where AEMO considers that a change in one or more of the
criteria in clause 2.30.5 means that an Aggregated Facility should no
longer be aggregated, AEMO must notify the relevant Rule Participant of:

\(a\) its decision and the reasons for its decision; and

\(b\) the date on which the Aggregated Facility will be considered to
have been disaggregated.

2.30.8A. Where AEMO has notified a Market Participant under clause
2.30.8 that an Aggregated Facility should no longer be aggregated, AEMO
may reassess the Facility Class in which each individual Facility is
registered in accordance with clause 2.29.9.

2.30.9. Where a Rule Participant no longer wishes to operate a Facility
as an Aggregated Facility from a specified date, the Rule Participant
may apply to AEMO to disaggregate the Facilities from that specified
date in accordance with the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.31.25
and section 2.33.

2.30.10. Where an Aggregated Facility is disaggregated in accordance
with clauses 2.30.8 or 2.30.9:

\(a\) the relevant Rule Participant must ensure each disaggregated
Facility is registered in accordance with the process outlined in
section 2.31, as a separate Facility for the purpose of these WEM Rules
from the date specified by AEMO or the Rule Participant, as applicable;
and

\(b\) AEMO may require the Rule Participant to provide Standing Data
relevant to each disaggregated Facility.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 2.30A 'Exemption from Funding Spinning Reserve' is deleted as
exemptions are no longer given. Generators &lt;10MW are automatically
excluded from the runway calculation as per the method in Appendix
2A.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.30A. \[Blank\]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 2.30B is amended to reflect different treatment for new
Intermittent Loads registered after the New WEM Commencement Day.</p>
<p>Prior to the New WEM Commencement Day, an Intermittent Load is all or
part of a Non-Dispatchable Load (defined at connection point level). In
the new market, an Intermittent Load is always part of a Facility. It is
a special type of 'Load' Facility Technology Type, which refers to an
entity behind the connection point.</p>
<p>The calculations in clauses 2.30B.2(a)(iii) and 2.30B.4 have been
deleted as they are not used elsewhere in the WEM Rules.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.30B. Intermittent Load

2.30B.1 An Intermittent Load is a Load, or a part of a Load associated
with consumption in excess of a level specified by the Market
Participant, that satisfies the requirements of clause 2.30B.2 and is
recorded in Standing Data as being an Intermittent Load.

2.30B.2. For a Load or part of a Load to be eligible to be an
Intermittent Load AEMO must be satisfied that the following conditions
are met:

\(a\) an Energy Producing System must have the following
characteristics:

i\. it can typically supply the maximum quantity of energy consumed by
that Load to be treated as Intermittent Load without requiring energy to
be withdrawn from a Network; and

ii\. the output of which is netted off consumption of the Load by the
meter measuring consumption of the Load, or which is always or at times
electrically connected to the Load behind two or more shared network
connection points;

\(b\) the Intermittent Load shall reasonably be expected to have net
consumption of energy (based on Metered Schedules calculated in
accordance with the methodology prescribed in clauses 2.30B.10 or
2.30B.11) for not more than 4320 Trading Intervals in any Capacity Year,
excluding Trading Intervals in which the Facility containing the Load is
delivering a service under an NCESS Contract;

\(c\) the Market Participant for the Facility containing the Load must
have an agreement in place with a Network Operator to allow energy to be
supplied to the Load from a Network;

\(d\) \[Blank\]

\(e\) the Facility containing the Load is not expected (based on
applications accepted by AEMO under clause 2.29.5D and any amendments
accepted by AEMO under clause 2.29.5K) to be associated with any Demand
Side Programme for any period following the registration of the Load or
part of the Load as an Intermittent Load; and

\(f\) the Facility containing the Load is connected to the transmission
network registered by the Network Operator referred to in clause
2.30B.2(c).

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.30B.3 is amended to require Market Participants to provide
additional information about Intermittent Loads.</p>
<p>The information provided under clause 2.30B.3(b) is only required for
the calculation of Intermittent Load Refunds, which are only applicable
to Intermittent Loads that existed before the New WEM Commencement
Day.</p>
<p>The measurements provided under clause 2.30B.3(h) are required for
AEMO monitoring and for the Contingency Reserve Raise runway calculation
in Appendix 2A.</p>
<p>The information provided under clauses 2.30B.3(i) and 2.30B.3(j) are
important determinants in the Intermittent Load IRCR calculations.
Increasing them has potential to decrease the overall IRCR associated
with the Facility containing the Intermittent Load.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.30B.3. The Market Participant for a Load or part of a Load to be
treated as an Intermittent Load must, in addition to any Standing Data
for the Facility containing the Load, provide, and ensure remains
accurate, the following data in regard to the Facility:

\(a\) the maximum capacity in MW, excluding capacity for which Capacity
Credits are held, that the Energy Producing System referred to in clause
2.30B.2(a) can be guaranteed to have available to supply Intermittent
Load, when it is operated normally at an ambient temperature of 41
degrees Celsius;

\(b\) where the Load is and continues to be deemed to be an Intermittent
Load under clause 1.48.2:

i\. the anticipated reduction, measured in MW, in the maximum capacity
described in clause 2.30B.3(a) when the ambient temperature is 45
degrees Celsius;

ii\. at the option of the Market Participant, the method to be used to
measure the ambient temperature at the site of the Energy Producing
System referred to in clause 2.30B.2(a) for the purpose of determining
Intermittent Load Refunds, where the method specified may be either:

1\. a publicly available daily maximum temperature at a location
representative of the conditions at the site of the Energy Producing
System as reported daily by a meteorological service; or

2\. a daily maximum temperature measured at the site of the Energy
Producing System by the SCADA system operated by AEMO or the relevant
Network Operator (as applicable),

where no method is specified, a temperature of 41 degrees Celsius will
be assumed; and

\(c\) details of primary and any alternative fuels, including details
and evidence of both firm and non-firm fuel supplies and the factors
that determine restrictions on fuel availability that could prevent the
Energy Producing System referred to in clause 2.30B.2(a) from operating
at its full capacity;

\(d\) a single line diagram which includes details of the Loads and
Energy Producing Systems contained within the Facility and any other
information AEMO requires to determine whether the Load meets the
conditions specified in clause 2.30B.2;

\(e\) the Nominated Excess Capacity;

\(f\) the Declared Sent Out Capacity and any other information AEMO
requires to determine the System Size of the Facility;

\(g\) at the option of the Market Participant, information regarding
protection schemes at the Facility, including whether the Facility is
configured to automatically adjust load or generation where a
Contingency Event, or an event behind the relevant connection point,
affects the Energy Producing System, and evidence to support that
configuration as required in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause
2.29.4N;

\(h\) the instantaneous output or consumption of the Energy Producing
System referred to in clause 2.30B.2(a) measured in accordance with the
WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.36A.5, with separate measurements
for each separate electricity producing unit in the Energy Producing
System;

\(i\) the maximum level of Intermittent Load for the Facility referred
to in Appendix 1(g)(ii); and

\(j\) the Contract Maximum Demand associated with the Facility.

2.30B.4. \[Blank\]

2.30B.5. A Market Participant may apply for a Load or part of a Load to
be treated as an Intermittent Load where the Market Participant has
submitted or changed Standing Data for the Facility in accordance with
clause 2.34.2B(b) and:

\(a\) the Load is part of a Non-Dispatchable Load; or

\(b\) the Load is part of a Registered Facility.

The application must include the information in clause 2.30B.3, except
for clause 2.30B.3(h).

2.30B.6. AEMO must accept an application for a Load or part of a Load to
be treated as an Intermittent Load if the requirements of clause 2.30B.2
are satisfied.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.30B.7 was initially amended to align with the new settlement
timetable. However, clause 2.30B.7 is amended in the Tranche 6
Amendments to reverse the Tranche 5 Amendments replacement of “Trading
Month” with “Trading Week”, because IRCRs will still be determined on a
Trading Month basis and the relevant appendices (4A and 5) assume that
the Intermittent Load status of a load does not change
mid-month.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.30B.7. AEMO may cease to treat a Load or part of a Load as an
Intermittent Load and require a Market Participant to modify its
Standing Data in accordance with clause 2.34.11 from the commencement of
a Trading Month if AEMO considers that the requirements of clause
2.30B.2 are no longer satisfied.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>The quantities provided under clauses 2.30B.3(j) and 2.30B.3(k) are
important determinants in the Intermittent Load IRCR calculations.
Increasing them has potential to decrease the overall IRCR associated
with the Facility containing the Intermittent Load, to the detriment of
other Market Participants. If an Intermittent Load seeks to increase
these values, they would then fall under the new arrangements for
Intermittent Loads, where IRCR is calculated based on actual net import,
rather than separated into Intermittent Load component which is not
subject to the markup applied to other loads.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.30B.8. Subject to clause 2.30B.8A, where a Market Participant seeks to
increase the absolute value of the quantities provided under clauses
2.30B.3(i) or 2.30B.3(j) by more than 10 MW from the quantities in
effect for that Intermittent Load on the New WEM Commencement Day, the
Market Participant must make a new application under clause 2.30B.5 for
the Load to be treated as an Intermittent Load, and clause 1.48.2 will
no longer apply to the Load.

2.30B.8A. Where AEMO determines that an increase in the absolute value
of the quantities provided under clauses 2.30B.3(i) or 2.30B.3(j) is
necessary to implement the terms of a NCESS Contract, clause 2.30B.8
does not apply to the Intermittent Load.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>A person will nominate an expected maximum export value for the
Facility containing the Intermittent Load. Where this value is less than
10 MW, the owner/controller and the facility are presumptively exempted
from registration requirements, regardless of whether the DSOC exceeds
10 MW, or whether there is more than 10 MW of Energy Producing System
behind the fence.</p>
<p>Where the actual export persistently or significantly exceeds the
nominated value. the participant must update the value, and where it is
now greater than 10 MW, the presumptive exemption no longer
applies.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.30B.8B. A person who owns, controls or operates a Facility containing
an Intermittent Load may apply to AEMO to be exempted from the
requirement to register as a Rule Participant in the Market Participant
class in accordance with clause 2.28.16C, where:

\(a\) the person has submitted an application for another Market
Participant to act as their Intermediary in accordance with clause
2.28.16A(a); and

\(b\) where the consumption or generation from the metered meter or
meters measuring the relevant Facility containing the Intermittent Load
is registered to the Intermediary for the purposes of clause 8.3.1.

2.30B.8C. Without limiting AEMO's rights to revoke an exemption under
clause 2.28.16, AEMO may revoke an exemption to register that was based
on the conditions specified in clause 2.28.16C where AEMO considers that
any of the conditions specified in clause 2.30B.8B are no longer
satisfied.

2.30B.8D. Notwithstanding clause 2.29.4, where AEMO has accepted an
application under clause 2.30B.6 for a Facility with a Nominated Excess
Capacity of less than 10 MW, AEMO must determine (under clause 2.29.4M)
that the person who owns, controls or operates the Facility is exempted
from the requirement to register the Facility.

2.30B.8E. Where a Facility containing an Intermittent Load has a
Nominated Excess Capacity greater than or equal to 10 MW, the relevant
Market Participant must register the Facility in accordance with section
2.29, or apply to be exempted from the requirement to register.

2.30B.8EA.Where a Market Participant registers a Facility in accordance
with clause 2.30B.8E, AEMO must assess the application in respect of the
export capability of the Facility only, regardless of the System Size of
the Energy Producing System referred to in clause 2.30B.2(a).

2.30B.8F. Where the Injection of a Facility containing an Intermittent
Load exceeds the Nominated Excess Capacity in more than 120 Dispatch
Intervals in any continuous 12-month period, the Market Participant must
update the Nominated Excess Capacity provided under clause 2.30B.3(e).

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.30B.9 clarifies the settlement treatment of Facilities
containing Intermittent Loads, and reflects the approach already
implicit in the current WEM Rules.</p>
<p>The quantity in subclause (c) is the Metered Schedule for the
non-registered part of the facility. Although it is called a
Non-Dispatchable Load, it includes everything unregistered behind the
connection point (other than the Intermittent Load component if present)
which may include load, generation and storage.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.30B.9. For the purpose of defining Metered Schedules, each Facility
containing an Intermittent Load is represented by the following
components:

\(a\) where the Intermittent Load is part of a Registered Facility, a
Registered Facility component;

\(b\) where the Load was deemed to be an Intermittent Load under clause
1.48.2, an Intermittent Load component; and

\(c\) a remaining Load component, which may be Temperature Dependent or
Non-Temperature Dependent.

2.30B.10. Where the Load was deemed to be an Intermittent Load under
clause 1.48.2, for the purpose of defining Metered Schedules associated
with the interval meter measuring the Facility containing the
Intermittent Load, the following methodology is to apply:

\(a\) define for each Trading Interval:

i\. NMQ to be the net metered energy measured by the meter where a
positive amount indicates supply and a negative amount indicates
consumption;

ii\. NS to be the net supply (supply as a positive value plus
consumption as a negative value) measured by the Intermittent Load meter
which corresponds to supply and consumption, excluding consumption by
Intermittent Loads, by Market Participants, and by Market Participant
Facilities which are separately metered for the purpose of settlement
under these WEM Rules. This may have a positive or negative value;

iii\. NL to be the maximum possible consumption behind that meter due to
consumption which is not Intermittent Load but which is measured only by
the meter which also measures the Intermittent Load. This has a negative
value;

iv\. \[Blank\]

v\. if the Load is part of a Registered Facility, MSG to be the greater
of zero and the maximum energy output from the Registered Facility in
excess of that required to supply the Intermittent Load based on
Standing Data and measured only by the Intermittent Load meter. This has
a positive value; and

vi\. AMQ to be the adjusted meter quantity which equals NMQ less NS;

\(b\) if the Load is not part of a Registered Facility then:

i\. if AMQ is less than or equal to NL then:

1\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with the Intermittent Load is AMQ minus NL; and

2\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with non-Intermittent Loads only measured by the
Intermittent Load meter is NL;

ii\. if AMQ is greater than NL but less than zero then:

1\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with the Intermittent Load is zero; and

2\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with non-Intermittent Loads only measured by the
Intermittent Load meter is AMQ; and

iii\. if AMQ is greater than or equal to zero then:

1\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with the Intermittent Load is AMQ; and

2\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with non-Intermittent Loads only measured by the
Intermittent Load meter is zero; and

\(c\) if the Load is part of a Registered Facility then:

i\. if AMQ is less than or equal to NL then:

1\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with the Intermittent Load is AMQ minus NL;

2\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with non-Intermittent Loads measured only by the
meter that also measures the Intermittent Load is NL; and

3\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with the Registered Facility measured only by the
meter that also measures the Intermittent Load is zero;

ii\. if AMQ is greater than NL but less than or equal to zero then:

1\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with the Intermittent Load is zero;

2\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with non-Intermittent Loads measured only by the
meter that also measures the Intermittent Load is AMQ; and

3\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with the Registered Facility measured only by the
meter that also measures the Intermittent Load is zero;

iii\. if AMQ is greater than zero but less than or equal to MSG then:

1\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with the Intermittent Load is zero;

2\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with non-Intermittent Loads measured only by the
meter that also measures the Intermittent Load is zero; and

3\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with the Registered Facility measured only by the
meter that also measures the Intermittent Load is AMQ; and

iv\. if AMQ is greater than MSG then:

1\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with the Intermittent Load is AMQ minus MSG;

2\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with non-Intermittent Loads measured only by the
meter that also measures the Intermittent Load is zero; and

3\. for the purpose of defining its Metered Schedule the metered
quantity associated with the Registered Facility measured only by the
meter that also measures the Intermittent Load is MSG.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Replacement clause 2.30B.11 allows for different participants to be
responsible for the injection and withdrawal of the Facility containing
a new Intermittent Load, as is the case for some Intermittent Loads in
the current WEM Rules.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.30B.11 Where an application for a Load or part of a Load to be treated
as an Intermittent Load was accepted by AEMO under clause 2.30B.6 on or
after the New WEM Commencement Day, for the purpose of defining Metered
Schedules associated with the interval meter measuring the Facility
containing the Intermittent Load, the following methodology is to apply:

\(a\) define for each Trading Interval:

i\. NMQ to be the net metered energy measured by the meter in Meter Data
Submissions where a positive amount indicates supply and a negative
amount indicates consumption;

ii\. NS to be the net supply (supply as a positive value plus
consumption as a negative value) measured by the Intermittent Load meter
which corresponds to supply and consumption, excluding consumption by
Intermittent Loads, by Market Participants, and by Market Participant
Facilities which are separately metered in Meter Data Submissions for
the purpose of settlement under these WEM Rules. This may have a
positive or negative value; and

iii\. AMQ to be the adjusted meter quantity which equals NMQ less NS;

\(b\) where the Intermittent Load is part of a Registered Facility:

i\. where AMQ is positive, indicating supply:

1\. the Metered Schedule for the Registered Facility is AMQ; and

2\. the Metered Schedule for the Non-Dispatchable Load is zero; or

ii\. where AMQ is negative, indicating consumption:

1\. the Metered Schedule for the Registered Facility is zero; and

2\. the Metered Schedule for the Non-Dispatchable Load is AMQ; or

\(c\) where the Intermittent Load is not part of a Registered Facility,
the Metered Schedule for the Non-Dispatchable Load is AMQ.

2.30C. Rule Commencement and Registration Data

2.30C.1. Subject to sections 1.47, 1.48, 1.49 and 1.54A, AEMO must not
require that an applicant for Rule Participant registration or Facility
registration provide information on any application form, or evidence to
support that application form, pertaining to registration if the
applicable WEM Rules requiring that information to be provided have not
commenced.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Amendments to section 2.31 have been made to incorporate applications
for Facility aggregation, Facility disaggregation and Facility Class
reassessment and to incorporate amendments in alignment with the revised
registration taxonomy.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.31. Registration Process

2.31.1. AEMO must maintain the following forms on the WEM Website:

\(a\) Rule Participant registration form;

\(b\) Rule Participant de-registration form;

\(c\) Facility registration form;

\(d\) Facility de-registration form;

\(e\) Facility transfer form;

\(f\) Facility aggregation form;

\(g\) Facility disaggregation form; and

\(h\) Facility Class reassessment form.

2.31.2. A person intending to submit an application described in clause
2.31.1 must provide the information specified in section 2.33, as
applicable, and any applicable Application Fees to AEMO.

2.31.3. AEMO must notify an applicant of the receipt of the application
within one Business Day of receipt of an application form described in
clause 2.31.1.

2.31.4. Subject to clause 2.30C.1, AEMO may, at its discretion, require
that an applicant provide information that is missing from the relevant
application form, or is inadequately specified. The date at which the
requested information is submitted to AEMO in full is to become the date
of receipt of the application for the purpose of clause 2.31.3.

2.31.4A. If AEMO requests information from an applicant under clause
2.31.4 and the applicant does not provide the information to AEMO within
20 Business Days of the date of AEMO's request, the applicant will be
deemed to have withdrawn the application.

2.31.5. AEMO may consult with the relevant Network Operators with
respect to applications for registration, de-registration, transfer or
Facility Class reassessment of Facilities containing Energy Producing
Systems or Loads.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clauses 2.31.6 and 2.31.10 are amended to account for the commonly
occurring scenario in which AEMO does not require any tests to be
conducted in order for it to accept or reject an application for
Facility registration. In these scenarios, clause 2.31.6 will not apply
and AEMO will be required to notify the applicant of its decision to
accept or reject the application within 20 Business Days from the date
of notification of receipt of the application.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.31.6. If AEMO determines that a test required by these WEM Rules or a
WEM Procedure must be conducted in order for AEMO to accept or reject an
application for Facility registration, AEMO must notify the applicant
within 15 Business Days from the date of notification of receipt of the
application of:

\(a\) the dates on which any required tests may be held;

\(b\) the date by when results of any required tests must be made
available to AEMO; and

\(c\) the date by when AEMO expects to accept or reject the application,
being no later than 10 Business Days after the date in clause 2.31.6(b).

2.31.7. When a test is required under the WEM Rules or a WEM Procedure,
prior to the registration of a Facility, AEMO may determine that the
test is not necessary and in doing so must take into consideration any
previous tests performed in connection with an Arrangement for Access.

2.31.8. AEMO must allow a Facility holding an Arrangement for Access to
operate for the purpose of tests required under the Arrangement for
Access, provided that the carrying out of these tests has received
approval from AEMO.

2.31.9. The relevant Network Operator must cooperate with any tests
required by these WEM Rules or a WEM Procedure that must be conducted
prior to the registration of a Facility.

2.31.10. AEMO must determine whether to accept or reject the application
and notify an applicant accordingly:

\(a\) by the date specified in accordance with clause 2.31.6(c) in the
case of an application for Facility registration where AEMO has
determined that a test must be conducted in order for AEMO to accept or
reject the application; and

\(b\) within 20 Business Days after the date of notification of receipt
for all other applications.

2.31.11. Where AEMO has accepted the application the notification under
clause 2.31.10 must include:

\(a\) in the case of an application to register as a Rule Participant
the date and time that registration is to take effect where the date is
to be the later of the earliest date by which AEMO can facilitate the
registration and the date specified in accordance with clause 2.33.1(k);

\(b\) in the case of an application to de-register as a Rule
Participant:

i\. where the Rule Participant is a Market Participant, the date and
time on which the Rule Participant must cease trading as a Market
Participant, being the start of the Trading Day beginning on the date
specified in accordance with clause 2.33.2(d); and

ii\. a statement that de-registration as a Rule Participant will not
take effect until the requirements of clause 2.31.16 are satisfied;

\(c\) in the case of an application to register a Facility, the date and
time that registration is to take effect where the date is to be the
later of the earliest date by which AEMO can facilitate the registration
and the date specified in accordance with clause 2.33.3(c)(xviii);

\(d\) in the case of an application to de-register a Facility, the date
and time that de-registration is to take effect where the date is to be
the later of the earliest date by which AEMO can facilitate the
de-registration and the date specified in accordance with clause
2.33.4(d);

\(e\) in the case of an application to transfer a Facility, the date and
time that transfer is to take effect where the date is to be the later
of the earliest date by which AEMO can facilitate the transfer and the
date specified in accordance with clause 2.33.5(e)(iii);

\(f\) in the case of an application to aggregate two or more Facilities,
the date and time the aggregation is to take effect, where the date is
to be the later of the earliest date by which AEMO can facilitate the
aggregation and the date specified in accordance with clause 2.33.6(d);

\(g\) in the case of an application to disaggregate two or more
Facilities, the date and time that is to take effect, where the date is
to be the later of the earliest date by which AEMO can facilitate the
disaggregation and the date specified in accordance with clause
2.33.7(d); and

\(h\) in the case of an application for Facility Class reassessment, the
date and time that the Facility Class change is to take effect, where
the date is to be the later of the earliest day by which AEMO can
facilitate the Facility Class change and the date specified in
accordance with clause 2.33.8(c).

2.31.12. Where AEMO has rejected the application the notification must
include the reason for its rejection of the application.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.31.13(l) is amended to reflect that Capacity Credits are
allocated on a Trading Day basis.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.31.13. AEMO may only reject an application if:

\(a\) subject to clause 2.30C.1, the application form, when read
together with any information received after a request under clause
2.31.4 is incomplete or provides insufficient detail;

\(b\) subject to clause 2.30C.1, required supporting evidence is
insufficient or not provided;

\(c\) the required Application Fee is not paid;

\(d\) AEMO is not satisfied that the applicant can comply with the
requirements for participation in the Wholesale Electricity Market or
registration;

\(e\) in the case of an application to register as a Rule Participant
where the person has previously been de-registered as a Rule Participant
following an order from the Electricity Review Board or de-registered by
AEMO under clause 2.32.7E(b), AEMO is not satisfied that person has
remedied the reason for or underlying cause of the prior
de-registration;

\(f\) in the case of an application to de-register as a Market
Participant, the applicant has not arranged to de-register its
Registered Facilities or transfer those Registered Facilities to another
Rule Participant prior to the proposed date of de-registration as a
Market Participant;

\(g\) \[Blank\]

\(h\) in the case of an application to de-register as a Network
Operator, the applicant has not arranged to de-register its Registered
Facilities that are Networks or transfer those Registered Facilities to
another Rule Participant prior to the proposed date of de-registration
as a Network Operator;

\(i\) the applicant fails to conduct tests in accordance with clause
2.31.6, fails the tests, or fails to provide adequate information about
the tests;

\(j\) in the case of an application to register a Facility:

i\. the relevant Metering Data Agent informs AEMO that the Facility or
the interval meter for the Facility is not registered in its Meter
Registry or that the Meter Registry information is not consistent with
the information in the application to register the Facility;

ii\. the controllability assessment undertaken by AEMO in accordance
with clause 2.29.4N determines that the Facility is not able to meet the
controllability requirements for the requested Facility Class; or

iii\. the Facility is not able to meet the requirements for the
requested Facility Class;

\(k\) in the case of an application to de-register a Facility, the
Market Participant holds Capacity Credits for the Facility;

\(l\) in the case of an application to transfer a Facility, the transfer
of the Facility would result in the number of Capacity Credits allocated
for a Trading Day by the Market Participant transferring the Facility
exceeding the number of Capacity Credits held for that Trading Day for
the Facility by the Market Participant that are able to be traded
bilaterally under the WEM Rules;

\(m\) in the case of an application for a Facility aggregation, AEMO
considers the aggregation will not meet the criteria in clause 2.30.5;

\(n\) in the case of an application for a Facility disaggregation, the
Facility meets the criteria in clause 2.30.5(g)(ii); or

\(o\) in the case of an application for a Facility Class reassessment:

i\. if the controllability assessment undertaken by AEMO in accordance
with clause 2.29.4N determines that the Facility is not able to meet the
controllability requirements for the requested Facility Class; and

ii\. if the Facility is not able to meet the requirements applicable for
the requested Facility Class.

2.31.14. A person who has an application to become a Rule Participant
approved, is to become a Rule Participant in the approved class from the
date and time specified in accordance with clause 2.31.11(a).

2.31.15. A person who has an application to deregister as a Rule
Participant accepted by AEMO must cease trading as a Market Participant
by the date and time specified in clause 2.31.11(b)(i).

2.31.16. Where an application for de-registration as a Rule Participant
has been accepted by AEMO, participation in the relevant Rule
Participant class ceases from the end of the first Business Day in which
the Rule Participant:

\(a\) has de-registered all of its Facilities applicable to the class;

\(b\) has resolved and settled all outstanding disputes, investigations
and enforcement actions;

\(c\) has paid all outstanding debts to AEMO; and

\(d\) has received final payment of all amounts owed to it by AEMO.

2.31.17. The fact that a person has ceased to be registered as a Rule
Participant does not affect any right, obligation or liability of that
person under these WEM Rules which arose prior to the cessation of its
registration.

2.31.18. If AEMO accepts a Facility registration then that Facility
becomes a Registered Facility of the applicant from the date and time
specified in accordance with clause 2.31.11(c).

2.31.19. If AEMO accepts a Facility deregistration then that Facility
ceases being a Registered Facility of the applicant from the date and
time specified in accordance with clause 2.31.11(d).

2.31.20. If AEMO accepts a Facility transfer then from the date and time
specified in accordance with clause 2.31.11(e):

\(a\) each Facility covered by the transfer will cease to be a
Registered Facility of the Rule Participant to whom it was registered
prior to the transfer; and

\(b\) each Facility covered by the transfer will become a Registered
Facility of the Rule Participant who submitted the application.

2.31.21. If AEMO approves a Facility aggregation application then the
Facility will be aggregated and registered as a single Facility from the
date and time specified and in accordance with clause 2.31.11(f).

2.31.22. If AEMO approves a Facility disaggregation application then the
Facility will be disaggregated and registered as the constituent
Facilities from the date and time specified in accordance with clause
2.31.11(g).

2.31.23. If AEMO determines that a Facility should be registered in a
different Facility Class, then the Facility Class change will be
effective from the date determined by AEMO and notified to the Market
Participant in accordance with the WEM Procedure referred to in clause
2.31.25.

2.31.24. AEMO must maintain a register of:

\(a\) Rule Participants; and

\(b\) Registered Facilities.

2.31.25. AEMO must document the following processes that AEMO and other
Rule Participants, as applicable, must follow in a WEM Procedure:

\(a\) Rule Participant registration;

\(b\) Facility registration, de-registration, aggregation and
disaggregation;

\(c\) Facility Class reassessment; and

\(d\) Facility transfers.

2.31.26. Applicants must follow the processes in the WEM Procedure
referred to in clause 2.31.25 applicable to the Rule Participant class,
Facility Class and type of application.

2.31.27. AEMO must facilitate participation in a Rule Participant class
or Facility Class by an approved applicant as soon as practicable.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 2.32 has been amended to require AEMO to publish Suspension
Notices of a Rule Participant, and any subsequent withdrawals, on the
WEM Website.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.32. Rule Participant Suspension and Deregistration

2.32.1. Where the Economic Regulation Authority receives notice that the
Electricity Review Board has made a decision in accordance with the
Regulations that a Rule Participant be suspended, the Economic
Regulation Authority must notify AEMO and AEMO must issue a Suspension
Notice to the Rule Participant.

2.32.2. Where AEMO has issued a Suspension Notice pursuant to a
notification by the Economic Regulation Authority in accordance with
clause 2.32.1 that a Rule Participant be suspended, AEMO must publish a
notice on the WEM Website and issue a Market Advisory specifying that
the Rule Participant has been suspended from the Wholesale Electricity
Market and provide details of the suspension, including the reason for
the suspension and the date the suspension took effect.

2.32.2A. If a Suspension Notice is withdrawn, AEMO must promptly publish
a notice on the WEM Website and issue a Market Advisory specifying that
the Suspension Notice has been withdrawn.

2.32.3 AEMO may specify in a Suspension Notice directions that the
relevant Rule Participant must comply with to give effect to the
suspension.

2.32.4. From the time AEMO issues a Suspension Notice to a Rule
Participant:

\(a\) the Rule Participant must comply with the Suspension Notice,
including:

i\. trading or ceasing trading in the Wholesale Electricity Market to
the extent specified in the notice; and

ii\. continuing to meet any existing Reserve Capacity Obligations
specified in the notice.

\(b\) AEMO may do all or any of the following to give effect to the
notice:

i\. reject any submissions from, or on behalf of, the Market
Participant, and cancel any existing submissions; and

ii\. withhold payments owed to a defaulting Rule Participant.

2.32.5. AEMO must withdraw a Suspension Notice where:

\(a\) if the notice was issued under section 9.19, the defaulting Rule
Participant has remedied the relevant suspension event and is complying
with its Prudential Obligations; and

\(b\) if the notice was issued under clause 2.32.1, it receives a
further notice that the Electricity Review Board has withdrawn the
suspension,

and no other circumstances exist that would entitle AEMO to issue a
Suspension Notice.

2.32.6. Where a Rule Participant has been suspended for 90 days AEMO
must notify the Economic Regulation Authority and, the Economic
Regulation Authority may apply to the Electricity Review Board for a
de-registration order in accordance with the Regulations.

2.32.7. Where the Economic Regulation Authority receives notice that the
Electricity Review Board has made a decision in accordance with the
Regulations that a Rule Participant be de-registered, the relevant Rule
Participant ceases to be a Rule Participant from the time specified in
the notice, and the Economic Regulation Authority must notify AEMO. AEMO
must de-register all of the Facilities registered by or to the Rule
Participant by the time specified in the notice.

2.32.7A. AEMO may at any time review whether a Rule Participant
registered in the classes outlined in clauses 2.28.1(a) or 2.28.1(b)
continues to meet all of the criteria specified in clause 2.28.19.

2.32.7AA. A Rule Participant that is registered in a class outlined in
clauses 2.28.1(a) or 2.28.1(b) must notify AEMO as soon as it becomes
aware that it no longer meets all of the criteria specified in clause
2.28.19.

2.32.7B. If:

\(a\) the Economic Regulation Authority becomes aware that a Rule
Participant registered in the classes outlined in clauses 2.28.1(a) or
2.28.1(b) no longer meets all of the criteria specified in clause
2.28.19, it must notify AEMO; or

\(b\) AEMO becomes aware that a Rule Participant registered in the
classes outlined in clauses 2.28.1(a) or 2.28.1(b) no longer meets all
of the criteria specified in clause 2.28.19 (whether as a result of
being informed by the Economic Regulation Authority pursuant to clause
2.32.7B(a) or otherwise),

then, subject to clause 2.32.7BB(b), AEMO must issue a Registration
Correction Notice to that Rule Participant.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clauses 2.32.7BA and 2.32.7BB provide AEMO with an efficient and
practicable process to issue a Suspension Notice or Registration
Correction Notice where a Rule Participant no longer legally exists
(e.g. liquidated) or is under administration. Currently, section 2.32
only provides AEMO with the head of power to issue a Suspension Notice
and/or a Registration Correction Notice to the Rule Participant, but
does not clearly address situations where the legal entity no longer
exists or is under administration.</p>
<p>Clause 2.32.7BA is further amended to reflect changes made in March
2017 to the Corporations Act, which removed the definition of
‘externally-administered body corporate’.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.32.7BA. If AEMO becomes aware that a Rule Participant has become a
Chapter 5 body corporate (as defined in the Corporations Act), or is
under a similar form of administration under any laws applicable to it
in any jurisdiction, then AEMO must, as applicable:

\(a\) where AEMO intends to issue a Suspension Notice, issue the
Suspension Notice to the Chapter 5 body corporate and the External
Administrator, which may include directions that would have given in a
notice to the relevant Rule Participant pursuant to clause 2.32.1; or

\(b\) where AEMO intends to issue a Registration Correction Notice,
issue the Registration Correction Notice to the Chapter 5 body corporate
and the External Administrator, specifying details that it would have
specified in a notice to the relevant Rule Participant pursuant to
clause 2.32.7C; or

\(c\) notify the Economic Regulation Authority that the Rule Participant
is a Chapter 5 body corporate or has had an External Administrator
appointed, and that AEMO is not required to, as applicable:

i\. issue a Suspension Notice to the Rule Participant pursuant to clause
2.32.1; or

ii\. issue a Registration Correction Notice to the Rule Participant
pursuant to clause 2.32.7B(b).

2.32.7BB. If AEMO becomes aware that a Rule Participant has been wound
up or dissolved (as defined in the Corporations Act), AEMO:

\(a\) is not required to issue a Suspension Notice to the Rule
Participant pursuant to clause 2.32.1;

\(b\) is not required to issue a Registration Correction Notice to the
Rule Participant pursuant to clause 2.32.7B(b);

\(c\) must de-register the Rule Participant and all of the Facilities
registered by or to the Rule Participant on a date and time nominated by
AEMO;

\(d\) must, as soon as practicable, notify the Economic Regulation
Authority that the Rule Participant has been wound up or dissolved; and

\(e\) must, as soon as practicable, publish a notice on the WEM Website
and issue a Market Advisory specifying that the Rule Participant will
cease, or has ceased, to be registered from the date and time nominated
by AEMO.

2.32.7C. Each Registration Correction Notice must:

\(a\) specify which of the criteria specified in clause 2.28.19 AEMO
considers the Rule Participant no longer meets;

\(b\) require that the Rule Participant:

i\. correct the circumstances that have led to it no longer meeting all
of the criteria specified in clause 2.28.19 and provide evidence to AEMO
that it has done so; or

ii\. provide evidence to AEMO that it continues to meet all of the
criteria specified in clause 2.28.19;

\(c\) specify a date and time for the Rule Participant to respond to the
Registration Correction Notice, which must be at least 90 days from the
date of the Registration Correction Notice; and

\(d\) specify a date and time from which the de-registration of the Rule
Participant will become effective, should that Rule Participant not
provide evidence in response to the Registration Correction Notice that
is satisfactory to AEMO.

2.32.7D. Where AEMO has issued a Registration Correction Notice it may
extend the deadline for:

\(a\) correcting the circumstances that are the subject of the notice;
or

\(b\) responding to the notice

for any period that it considers is appropriate in the circumstances.

2.32.7E. AEMO must consider any evidence or submissions provided by a
Rule Participant in response to a Registration Correction Notice and
determine whether:

\(a\) it is satisfied that the Rule Participant meets all of the
criteria specified in clause 2.28.19. If so, AEMO will notify the Rule
Participant that no further action will be taken; or

\(b\) it is not satisfied that the Rule Participant meets all of the
criteria specified in clause 2.28.19. If so, AEMO will issue a
De-registration Notice notifying the Rule Participant that it will cease
to be registered from the date and time specified in the De-registration
Notice and the Rule Participant will cease to be registered with effect
from that date and time.

2.32.7F. Where AEMO de-registers a Rule Participant it must also
de-register all of the Facilities registered by the Rule Participant by
the time specified in the De-registration Notice. For the avoidance of
doubt, AEMO must not de-register a Rule Participant, if that Rule
Participant holds Capacity Credits for any of its Facilities.

2.32.8. The de-registration of a Rule Participant does not affect any
rights, obligations or liabilities arising under or in connection with
these WEM Rules prior to the time the Rule Participant ceases to be a
Rule Participant.

2.32.9. AEMO may require a Network Operator to disconnect one or more of
the Facilities registered by a suspended or deregistered Rule
Participant in order to give effect to a Suspension Notice or
deregistration. If AEMO gives a notice under this clause to a Network
Operator, then the Network Operator must comply with the notice as soon
as practicable. If the disconnection arises because of the suspension of
a Market Participant and the Suspension Notice is subsequently withdrawn
by AEMO under clause 2.32.5, then AEMO must request the relevant Network
Operator to reconnect the Facilities registered by the relevant Rule
Participant.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Amendments to section 2.33 have been made to incorporate applications
for Facility Aggregation, Facility Dis-Aggregation and Facility Class
Reassessment.</p>
<p>Clause 2.33.1(h) is amended to remove the reference to information
described in Appendix 1(f), because this information is not provided via
the Rule Participant registration application form.</p>
<p>Clause 2.33.1(n) is amended to remove any scope for an interpretation
that the clause gives rise to cartel conduct between Rule Participants,
or gives effect to a contract, arrangement or understanding or concerted
practice between Rule Participants that substantially lessens
competition.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.33. The Registration Application Forms

2.33.1. AEMO must prescribe a Rule Participant registration application
form that requires an applicant to provide the following:

\(a\) the relevant non-refundable Application Fee;

\(b\) whether the applicant is already a Rule Participant;

\(c\) contact details for the applicant;

\(d\) invoicing details for the applicant;

\(e\) tax information from the applicant required by law;

\(f\) the class of Rule Participant to which the application relates;

\(g\) if the applicant is seeking an exemption from the requirement to
register as a Rule Participant;

\(h\) if the application relates to the sale of electricity to
Contestable Customers by an applicant for the Market Participant class,
evidence that the applicant holds an Arrangement for Access for the
purpose of taking power from the electricity grid;

\(i\) confirmation of the implementation of any processes or systems
required by these WEM Rules for the Rule Participant class to which the
application relates;

\(j\) information on any Facility registration applications that will
follow successful Rule Participant registration or are required as a
condition of Rule Participant registration;

\(k\) a proposed date for becoming a Rule Participant;

\(l\) information required for AEMO to determine the applicant’s
required Credit Limit;

\(m\) such other information AEMO requires to process the application;

\(n\) an acknowledgement from the Rule Participant that it is aware of
its obligations under these WEM Rules; and

\(o\) a statement that the information provided is accurate.

2.33.2. AEMO must prescribe a Rule Participant de-registration
application form that requires an applicant to provide the following:

\(a\) the relevant non-refundable Application Fee;

\(b\) the identity of the Rule Participant;

\(c\) the class of Rule Participant to which the application relates;

\(d\) a proposed date for ceasing operation in the Rule Participant
class covered by the application, where that date must be not earlier
than 10 Business Days after the date of application;

\(e\) such other information AEMO requires to process the application;
and

\(f\) a statement that the information provided is accurate.

2.33.3. AEMO must prescribe a Facility registration application form
that requires an applicant to provide the following:

\(a\) the relevant non-refundable Application Fee where this Application
Fee may differ for different Facility Classes;

\(b\) the identity of the person making the application, where that
person must be a Rule Participant or be in the process of applying to be
registered as a Rule Participant;

\(c\) for each Facility to be registered:

i\. the name of the Facility;

ii\. the owner of the Facility;

iii\. if the applicant is seeking an exemption from the requirement to
register a Facility;

iv\. the proposed Facility Class and each Facility Technology Type for
the Facility;

v\. the location of the Facility;

vi\. if the Facility is to be aggregated with one or more other
Facilities in accordance with section 2.30 and details of any proposed
aggregation;

vii\. if the Facility is a Small Aggregation;

viii\. the type of Facility as defined under clause 2.29.1B;

ix\. a single line diagram for the Facility, including the location of
transformers, switches, operation and interval meters (which are to be
maintained in the Meter Registry);

x\. the point on the network at which the Facility can connect;

xi\. the network nodes at which the Facility can connect;

xii\. contact details for the Facility;

xiii\. if the Facility is yet to commence operation:

1\. a proposed date for commencing commissioning the Facility; and

2\. a commissioning plan for the Facility.

xiv\. evidence that an Arrangement for Access is in place, if necessary;

xv\. details of operational control over that the Facility;

xvi\. applicable Standing Data as required by Appendix 1;

xvii\. information on the communication systems that exist for
operational control of the Facility; and

xviii\. a date for commencement of operation; and

\(d\) such other information AEMO requires to process the application;
and

\(e\) a statement that the information provided is accurate.

2.33.4. AEMO must prescribe a Facility de-registration application form
that requires an applicant to provide the following:

\(a\) the relevant non-refundable Application Fee;

\(b\) the name of the Registered Facility to which the application
relates;

\(c\) information as to whether the Registered Facility is being:

i\. decommissioned; or

ii\. moth-balled or placed in reserve shut-down, in which case
information on the time required to return the Registered Facility to
service is to be provided;

\(d\) a proposed date on which the Registered Facility is to cease to be
registered in the name of that Rule Participant where that date must be:

i\. not earlier than six months after the date of application if the
Facility will cease operation; or

ii\. the date the application is accepted in the event that the Facility
has been rendered permanently inoperable; or

iii\. not earlier than one month after the date of application if the
Facility is a Demand Side Programme; and

\(e\) such other information AEMO requires to process the application;
and

\(f\) a statement that the information provided is accurate.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.33.5(f) is amended to remove the reference to Special Price
Arrangements as a consequence of the Reserve Capacity Auction being
deleted.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.33.5. AEMO must prescribe a Facility transfer application form that
requires an applicant to provide the following:

\(a\) the relevant non-refundable Application Fee;

\(b\) the identity of the person making the application, where that
person must be a Rule Participant or be in the process of applying to be
registered as a Rule Participant;

\(c\) the name of the Rule Participant in respect of which the Facility
is currently registered;

\(d\) evidence that the Rule Participant identified in clause 2.33.5(c)
consents to the transfer;

\(e\) for each Facility to be transferred:

i\. the name of the Facility;

ii\. the owner of the Facility;

iii\. a proposed date for the transfer to take effect;

iv\. evidence that any required Arrangement for Access is in place; and

v\. details of operational control over the Facility; and

\(f\) evidence to AEMO’s satisfaction that the person making the
application has assumed the Reserve Capacity Obligations associated with
the Facility;

\(g\) such other information AEMO requires to process the application;
and

\(h\) a statement that the information provided is accurate.

2.33.6. AEMO must prescribe a Facility aggregation application form that
requires an applicant to provide the following:

\(a\) the relevant non-refundable Application Fee;

\(b\) the names of the Facilities to which the application relates;

\(c\) evidence to AEMO’s satisfaction that the conditions of clause
2.31.10(a) can be met;

\(d\) a proposed date on which the aggregation is to take effect;

\(e\) such other information AEMO requires to process the application;
and

\(f\) a statement that the information provided is accurate.

2.33.7. AEMO must prescribe a Facility disaggregation application form
that requires an applicant to provide the following:

\(a\) the relevant non-refundable Application Fee;

\(b\) the names of the Registered Facilities to which the application
relates;

\(c\) evidence satisfactory to AEMO that the requirement in clause
2.30.10(a) that each disaggregated Facility is to be registered as a
separate facility can be met;

\(d\) a proposed date on which the disaggregation is to take effect;

\(e\) such other information AEMO requires to process the application;
and

\(f\) a statement that the information provided is accurate.

2.33.8. AEMO must prescribe a Facility Class reassessment application
form that requires an applicant to provide the following:

\(a\) the relevant non-refundable Application Fee;

\(b\) the name of the Registered Facility to which the application
relates;

\(c\) the proposed Facility Class, which must be either Scheduled
Facility, Semi-Scheduled Facility or Non-Scheduled Facility, and a
proposed date on which the reassessment is to take effect;

\(d\) evidence to AEMO’s satisfaction that the Registered Facility meets
the conditions specified in clause 2.29.6;

\(e\) information required by AEMO to reassess the Facility Class;

\(f\) such other information AEMO requires to process the application;
and

\(g\) a statement that the information provided is accurate.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 2.34 sets out the obligations and associated processes with
respect to Standing Data.</p>
<p>Clause 2.34.7A is deleted as accreditation of Facilities for
providing Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Services
(<strong>FCESS</strong>) is dealt with in new section 2.34A.</p>
<p>Clauses 2.34.7B and 2.34.7C are deleted as a consequence of clause
2.34.7A being deleted.</p>
<p>Section 2.34 has been amended to modify the obligations and
associated processes with respect to Standing Data to reflect that
Standing Data may be used throughout the registration and participation
lifecycle.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34. Standing Data

2.34.1. AEMO must maintain a record of the Standing Data described in
Appendix 1, including the date from which the data applies.

2.34.2. Each Rule Participant must ensure that Standing Data required by
the WEM Rules to be provided to AEMO for that Rule Participant is and
remains accurate.

2.34.2A. A Rule Participant must, as soon as practicable, seek to have
its Standing Data revised, other than Standing Data described in clause
2.34.2B, if it becomes aware that its Standing Data is currently
inaccurate or not in compliance with the requirements of these WEM
Rules, or will become inaccurate or will cease to be in compliance with
the requirements of these WEM Rules within the next five Business Days.

2.34.2B. A Rule Participant may submit a proposed change to the
following Standing Data at any time:

\(a\) \[Blank\]

\(b\) whether a Load not currently treated as an Intermittent Load is to
be treated as an Intermittent Load, provided that the Rule Participant
is confident that the Load satisfies the requirements of clause 2.30B.2;
and

\(c\) whether a Load currently treated as an Intermittent Load is to
cease to be treated as an Intermittent Load.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.34.3 is amended to remove the reference to sections 6.2A
(Standing Bilateral Submission Timetable and Process) and 6.3C (Standing
STEM Submission Timetable and Process), because Standing Bilateral
Submissions and Standing STEM Submissions will not be classified as
Standing Data.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34.3. A Rule Participant that seeks to change its Standing Data must
notify AEMO of:

\(a\) the revisions it proposes be made to its Standing Data;

\(b\) the reason for the change; and

\(c\) the date from which the revision will take effect.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.34.4 is amended to clarify that this clause applies for any
Outage, whether approved or not.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34.4. Notwithstanding clauses 2.34.2 and 2.34.3, a Rule Participant is
not required to notify AEMO of changes to Standing Data where the
changes reflect a temporary change in the capacity or capability of a
Registered Facility resulting from an Outage.

2.34.5. AEMO must confirm receipt of the notification described in
clause 2.34.3 within one Business Day of receipt of notification.

2.34.6. AEMO may, at its discretion, request further information from a
Rule Participant, including requiring that tests be conducted and
evidence provided, concerning a notification of a change in Standing
Data described in clause 2.34.3. A Rule Participant must comply with a
request under this clause.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.34.7 has been modified, including new subclause (b) which
gives AEMO the power to reject a change in Standing Data where Standing
Data (parameter) is already required to be provided under another rule
requirement (e.g. section 2.34A) to ensure participants do not create or
change certain Standing Data where a pre-process or approval is
required. For example, if the Facility was accredited for FCESS, the
Standing Data value submitted (post-accreditation) does not differ to
value the Facility was accredited for.</p>
<p>The clause is further amended to require (not just permit) AEMO to
reject such changes.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34.7. AEMO:

\(a\) may reject a change in any Standing Data if it considers that an
inadequate explanation, including test results, was provided to justify
the change in Standing Data; and

\(b\) must reject a change where the Standing Data, including Standing
Data relating to the accreditation of a Facility to provide a Frequency
Co-optimised Essential System Service in accordance with section 2.34A,
is required to:

i\. be modified in accordance with processes in these WEM Rules other
than the processes in this section 2.34; or

ii\. firstly be approved by AEMO through processes in these WEM Rules
other than the processes set out in this section 2.34, and AEMO has not
given its approval to the change in Standing Data in accordance with
those other processes.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.34.8 is amended to remove the reference to sections 6.2A
(Standing Bilateral Submission Timetable and Process) and 6.3C (Standing
STEM Submission Timetable and Process), because Standing Bilateral
Submissions and Standing STEM Submissions will not be classified as
Standing Data.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34.8. AEMO must notify the Rule Participant of its acceptance or
rejection of the change in Standing Data as soon as practicable, and no
later than three Business Days after the later of:

\(a\) the date of notification described in clause 2.34.3; and

\(b\) if AEMO makes a request under clause 2.34.6, the date on which the
information requested is received by AEMO.

2.34.9. If AEMO rejects a change in Standing Data it must provide the
Rule Participant that requested the change with its reasons for
rejecting the change.

2.34.10. \[Blank\]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.34.11 is amended to remove the references to persons that
are exempt from the requirement to register as a Rule Participant,
because the clause relates to the provision of Standing Data and only
Rule Participants provide Standing Data to AEMO.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34.11. AEMO may require that a Rule Participant provide updated
Standing Data for any of its Facilities if AEMO considers the
information provided by the Rule Participant to be inaccurate or no
longer accurate.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>New clauses 2.34.12, 2.34.12A and 2.34.12B align with EPWA’s policy
intent to incorporate a lifecycle approach to registration and
participation.</p>
<p>Clause 2.34.12 gives AEMO the power to utilise Standing Data to
assess whether a Rule Participant continues to meet the requirements of
the WEM Rules. Many sections of the WEM Rules interlink with obligations
and requirements of Standing Data.</p>
<p>Clause 2.34.12A interlinks a change in Standing Data with the process
outlined under section 2.29 ‘Facility Class reassessments’ which may be
triggered by AEMO. This is to provide transparency that Standing Data
may be used as part of this process.</p>
<p>Clause 2.34.12B gives AEMO the power to confirm the Standing Data is
accurate from a person who is exempt from the requirement to register or
has been granted an exemption by AEMO to register to assess if the
exemption should be retained or revoked or to ensure that Power System
Security and Power System Reliability is maintained. Clause 2.34.12B is
further amended to remove the references to clauses 2.29.4B and 2.29.4C
to allow AEMO to request information regarding the Facility where any
exemption exists.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34.12. AEMO may use Standing Data to assess whether a Market
Participant continues to meet its obligations under these WEM Rules and
the WEM Procedures.

2.34.12A. AEMO may use Standing Data to assess whether a Registered
Facility continues to meet its obligations under these WEM Rules,
including the requirements of the Facility Class it is registered in.

2.34.12B. Where a person is exempted from the requirement to register a
Facility AEMO may request information regarding the Facility from that
person to assess whether the exemption should be revoked and the
information must be provided to AEMO by the time specified in the
request.

2.34.13. If AEMO requires a Rule Participant to provide updated Standing
Data under clause 2.34.11, then:

\(a\) The Rule Participant must provide AEMO with updated Standing Data
for the specified Registered Facility as soon as practicable; and

\(b\) where the Rule Participant fails to provide updated Standing Data
in a timely manner, AEMO may temporarily substitute data restricting the
capability of the Facility until such time as the Rule Participant
updates the Standing Data. AEMO must notify the Rule Participant when it
is using such substitute data.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.34.14 is amended to simplify the rules around the
commencement of changes to Standing Data items.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34.14. Revised Standing Data that is accepted by AEMO takes effect
from 8:00 AM on the later of:

\(a\) the date proposed by the Rule Participant; or

\(b\) the second day after the day on which AEMO accepts the revised
Standing Data.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 2.34A sets out the regime for accreditation of facilities for
providing FCESS.</p>
<p>Transitional rules and procedures are separately under development to
give effect to the Taskforce decision that all Registered Facilities
which are participating in Ancillary Services provision in the 2020
Capacity Year must be accredited to provide the equivalent FCESS from
the start of the new WEM in October 2022. The transitional arrangements
will also provide information to industry on how the Essential System
Service accreditation will be implemented, allowing other interested
Market Participants to accredit their Registered Facilities in
accordance with the relevant rules well-ahead of new market start.</p>
<p>Facilities providing Non-Co-optimised Essential System Services
(<strong>NCESS</strong>) will not be required to be accredited in
accordance with the regime set out in section 2.34A. However, it is
expected that those Facilities will need to meet certain requirements
that will be reflected in the amending rules that are to be developed
for NCESS in early 2021.</p>
<p>A Network Operator is not a Market Participant and will therefore be
unable to participate in the FCESS markets.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34A. Essential System Service Accreditation

Accreditation for Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Services

2.34A.1. AEMO may accredit a Facility to provide one or more of the
following Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Services:

\(a\) Regulation Raise;

\(b\) Regulation Lower;

\(c\) Contingency Reserve Raise;

\(d\) Contingency Reserve Lower; and

\(e\) RoCoF Control Service.

2.34A.2. A Market Participant may apply to AEMO for accreditation of a
Facility to provide one or more Frequency Co-optimised Essential System
Services referred to in clause 2.34A.1 in accordance with the WEM
Procedure referred to in clause 2.34A.13.

2.34A.3. Unless the relevant information is included as part of Standing
Data, an application for accreditation of a Facility made pursuant to
clause 2.34A.2 to provide one or more Frequency Co-optimised Essential
System Services referred to in clause 2.34A.1 must include:

\(a\) the identity of the Facility;

\(b\) the maximum quantity of each applicable Frequency Co-optimised
Essential System Service that the Facility intends to provide and where
that value would differ under different Facility operating
configurations;

\(c\) the Standing Enablement Minimum and Standing Enablement Maximum
for the Facility for each applicable Frequency Co-optimised Essential
System Service and where those values would differ under different
Facility operating configurations;

\(d\) the Standing Low Breakpoint and Standing High Breakpoint for the
Facility for each applicable Frequency Co-optimised Essential System
Service and where those values would differ under different Facility
operating configurations;

\(e\) for a Facility that is an Interruptible Load, the Restoration
Profile of the Interruptible Load if applicable;

\(f\) for an application to provide Contingency Reserve Raise, whether
the Facility will provide a Contingency Reserve Raise response in a
block or continuous manner if applicable; and

\(g\) any other information that may be specified in the WEM Procedure
referred to in clause 2.34A.13.

2.34A.4. AEMO must approve or reject an application for accreditation of
a Facility made pursuant to clause 2.34A.2, including any subsequent
amendments required by AEMO following consultation with the relevant
Market Participant, in accordance with the WEM Procedure referred to in
clause 2.34A.13, within 20 Business Days of the later of:

\(a\) receipt of the application under clause 2.34A.2; and

\(b\) receipt of all information required to be provided under clauses
2.34A.3 and as may be specified in the WEM Procedure referred to in
clause 2.34A.13, including the results of any required Facility tests
and re-tests.

2.34A.4A. Where AEMO requires tests or re-tests for a Facility, a Market
Participant must conduct the test or re-test and will be responsible for
the cost of that test or re-test.

2.34A.4B. AEMO may only require a test or re-test where AEMO considers
it reasonably necessary for AEMO to consider the accreditation of the
Facility to provide one or more Frequency Co-optimised Essential System
Services referred to in clause 2.34A.1.

2.34A.4C. A Market Participant may withdraw an application for
accreditation of a Facility made pursuant to clause 2.34A.2 at any time
prior to the application being approved or rejected by AEMO under clause
2.34A.4.

2.34A.5. If AEMO rejects an application for accreditation of a Facility
made pursuant to clause 2.34A.2, AEMO must provide reasons for the
rejection to the Market Participant.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.34A.6 is amended to include the Restoration Profile of a
Interruptible Load as a Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service
Accreditation Parameter. The information is included in an application
for FCESS accreditation under clause 2.34A.3(e), and should be
maintained through the accreditation process under section 2.34A rather
than only through the Standing Data process under section 2.34.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34A.6. If AEMO approves an application for accreditation of a Facility
made pursuant to clause 2.34A.2, it must, as soon as possible, inform
the Market Participant, together with notification of any required
amendments, including revised or additional parameters or settings, and
the Market Participant must include the following information in its
Standing Data for the Facility, or in such other place as specified in
the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.34A.13, in respect of each
Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service referred to in clause
2.34A.1 that the Facility is accredited to provide:

\(a\) the maximum quantity of each applicable Frequency Co-optimised
Essential System Service for each relevant Facility operating
configuration;

\(b\) the Standing Enablement Minimum and Standing Enablement Maximum
for each relevant Facility operating configuration;

\(c\) the Standing Low Breakpoint and Standing High Breakpoint for each
relevant Facility operating configuration;

\(d\) where the Facility is accredited to provide Contingency Reserve:

i\. the Facility Speed Factor (which must be based on the Facility’s
actual or modelled response to a local frequency excursion determined in
accordance with the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.34A.13);

ii\. whether the Facility is subject to the Maximum Contingency Reserve
Block Size; and

iii\. where the Facility is an Interruptible Load, the Restoration
Profile of the Interruptible Load if applicable;

\(e\) where the Facility is accredited to provide Regulation or RoCoF
Control Service, a Facility Performance Factor of one for each of these
Essential System Services; and

\(f\) any other performance parameters that may be specified in the WEM
Procedure referred to in clause 2.34A.13.

2.34A.7. If requested by AEMO, a Market Participant must promptly
provide AEMO with any information to clarify or support the information
referred to in clause 2.34A.6.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Where a Market Participant requests AEMO to amend the Frequency
Co-optimised Essential System Service Accreditation Parameters, AEMO may
require the Facility to undergo a test that may, potentially, result in
a reduction to the Facility’s accredited quantity of relevant FCESS.
AEMO would conduct the re-assessment taking into account the effect of
any outages.</p>
<p>Clause 2.34A.8 is intended to be a civil penalty provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34A.8. Where, in the Market Participant's reasonable opinion, the
performance of the Facility is varying significantly, or is likely to
vary significantly, from Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service
Accreditation Parameters for the Facility, or any performance
requirements specified in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause
2.34A.13, the Market Participant must provide the information in respect
of those matters to AEMO as soon as possible and request AEMO to amend
the Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service Accreditation
Parameters for the Facility to reflect the actual or likely varied
performance.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>AEMO is unlikely to decline a request to change the Frequency
Co-optimised Essential System Service Accreditation Parameters. However,
AEMO may require the Facility to undergo further testing to verify
whether the Facility is able to perform in accordance with the reduced
Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service Accreditation
Parameters</p>
<p>The intent of clause 2.34A.9 is to recognise that Frequency
Co-optimised Essential System Services Accreditation Parameters should
not be reviewed if the Facility was on a Planned Outage. However where
there is a Forced Outage, AEMO may consider reviewing the parameters
based on the impact of the Forced Outage on the Facility’s
performance.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34A.9. Clause 2.34A.8 does not apply to the extent that the
performance of the Facility is or is likely to be impacted by an Outage.

2.34A.10. Where a request to amend the Frequency Co-optimised Essential
System Service Accreditation Parameters for a Facility pursuant to
clause 2.34A.8:

\(a\) is made at least 12 months after AEMO's most recent assessment of
the Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service Accreditation
Parameters for the Facility, AEMO must consider the information and
assess whether the Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service
Accreditation Parameters should be amended; or

\(b\) is made less than 12 months after AEMO's most recent assessment of
the Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service Accreditation
Parameters for the Facility, AEMO may decline the request or may
consider the information and assess whether the Frequency Co-optimised
Essential System Service Accreditation Parameters should be amended.

2.34A.11. If AEMO becomes aware, either pursuant to clause 2.34A.10 or
through its own monitoring activities, that the performance of a
Facility has varied, is varying, or is likely to vary, significantly
from the Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service Accreditation
Parameters for the Facility, or any performance requirements specified
in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.34A.13, AEMO may reassess
the Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service Accreditation
Parameters, and notify the Market Participant of its decision to either:

\(a\) amend the Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service
Accreditation Parameters, the amendments it will make and the date that
the amendments will take effect from; or

\(b\) not amend the Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service
Accreditation Parameters,

and the reasons for its decision.

2.34A.12. Where AEMO amends the Frequency Co-optimised Essential System
Service Accreditation Parameters pursuant to clause 2.34A.11, the Market
Participant must, within 5 Business Days of receiving notification from
AEMO in accordance with clause 2.34A.11, update its Standing Data for
the Facility or information in such other place as specified in the WEM
Procedure referred to in clause 2.34A.13, to reflect the amended
Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service Accreditation
Parameters.

Determining RoCoF Ride-Through Capability

2.34A.12A. A Market Participant may apply to AEMO for accreditation of
the RoCoF Ride-Through Capability of each of its Facilities in
accordance with the WEM Procedure specified in clause 2.34A.13.

2.34A.12B. A Network Operator must apply to AEMO for accreditation of
the RoCoF Ride-Through Capability of each of its transmission systems or
distribution systems in accordance with the WEM Procedure specified in
clause 2.34A.13.

2.34A.12C. AEMO must determine, or re-determine, as applicable, in
accordance with the WEM Procedure specified in clause 2.34A.13, the
RoCoF Ride-Through Capability for a Facility pursuant to an application
made under clauses 2.34A.12A, 2.34A.12B, 2.34A.12E or in accordance with
clause 2.34A.12F.

2.34A.12D. As part of determining, or re-determining, as applicable, the
RoCoF Ride-Through Capability for a Facility, transmission system or
distribution system pursuant to an application made under clauses
2.34A.12A, 2.34A.12B or 2.34A.12E or in accordance with clause
2.34A.12F, AEMO may request the relevant Market Participant or Network
Operator to provide further information that may be reasonably required,
including engineering studies or reports, to demonstrate the RoCoF
Ride-Through Capability of the Facility, and the relevant Market
Participant or Network Operator must comply with the request within a
reasonable timeframe as agreed with AEMO.

2.34A.12E. Where, in the Market Participant's or Network Operator's
reasonable opinion, the RoCoF Ride-Through Capability of its Facility
has varied, is varying, or is likely to vary, significantly from the
value the Facility was accredited for under clause 2.34A.12C, the Market
Participant or Network Operator must apply to AEMO to re-determine the
RoCoF Ride-Through Capability accredited to the Facility, transmission
system or distribution system, as applicable.

2.34A.12F. Where AEMO becomes aware that the RoCoF Ride-Through
Capability of a Facility has varied, is varying, or is likely to vary,
significantly from the value the Facility was accredited for under
clause 2.34A.12C, AEMO must:

\(a\) notify the relevant Market Participant or Network Operator; and

\(b\) re-determine the RoCoF Ride-Through Capability accredited to the
relevant Facility in accordance with clause 2.34A.12C.

2.34A.12G. Where AEMO determines the RoCoF Ride-Through Capability
accredited to a Facility pursuant to clause 2.34A.12C, or as a result of
a re-determination pursuant to clauses 2.34A.12E or 2.34A.12F, the
relevant Market Participant or Network Operator must, within five
Business Days of receiving notification of the re-accreditation from
AEMO, update its Standing Data for its Facility or information in such
other place as specified in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause
2.34A.13, to reflect the amended RoCoF Ride-Through Capability for the
Facility.

2.34A.12H. Notwithstanding clauses 2.34A.12A, 2.34A.12B, 2.34A.12E or
2.34A.12F, AEMO may, in its sole discretion, deem the RoCoF Ride-Through
Capability of any Facility to be equal to the RoCoF Safe Limit.

Cost-recovery for RoCoF Control Service based on a Facility’s RoCoF
Ride-Through Capability

2.34A.12I. AEMO must determine a RoCoF Ride-Through Cost Recovery Limit
in accordance with the WEM Procedure specified in clause 2.34A.13. In
determining the RoCoF Ride-Through Cost Recovery Limit, AEMO must:

\(a\) not set the value higher than the RoCoF Upper Limit;

\(b\) set the limit to a precision of 0.1 Hz over 500 milliseconds; and

\(c\) subject to clause 2.34A.12I(a), set the limit above the RoCoF Safe
Limit by at least 0.25 Hz over 500 milliseconds.

2.34A.12J. Where the RoCoF Ride-Through Capability accredited to a
Facility under clause 2.34A.12C, or deemed to be accredited to a
Facility under clause 2.34A.12H, is equal to or lower than the RoCoF
Ride-Through Cost Recovery Limit, the Facility is deemed to be a RoCoF
Causer for the purposes of Appendix 2B.

WEM Procedure

2.34A.13. AEMO must document in a WEM Procedure the processes to be
followed by AEMO, Market Participants and Network Operators in respect
of the accreditation of a Facility under this section 2.34A or section
1.49. The WEM Procedure must include:

\(a\) in respect to the provision of a Frequency Co-Optimised Essential
System Service:

i\. the format of information which Market Participants must submit;

ii\. the performance parameters and requirements which must be satisfied
in order for a Facility to be accredited to provide a particular
Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service (for example, minimum
quantity, maximum response time, control facilities, measurement
facilities);

iii\. the manner and form of control system or communication
arrangements required for the provision, and monitoring, of each
Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service;

iv\. the Maximum Contingency Reserve Block Size and the method used to
determine the Maximum Contingency Reserve Block Size;

v\. the format and nature of data to be provided as evidence of
performance after each Contingency Event;

vi\. how AEMO will monitor and verify Facility performance against the
Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service Accreditation Parameters
for the Facility including modelling and testing requirements;

vii\. how AEMO will determine a Facility Speed Factor for the Facility
(so that it is possible for a Market Participant to estimate the
Facility Speed Factor likely to be applied to its Facility);

viii\. the process for a Market Participant to seek to amend the
Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service Accreditation Parameters
for a Facility;

ix\. the process AEMO will follow in considering whether to amend the
Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service Accreditation Parameters
for a Facility, including examples of changes to Facility performance
that would lead to an adjustment of the Frequency Co-optimised Essential
System Service Accreditation Parameters;

x\. the processes to be followed by AEMO and Market Participants for any
tests and re-tests of a Facility for the accreditation of a Facility to
provide a Frequency Co-optimised Essential System Service;

xi\. timeframes for notification requirements and provision of
information including updating any Standing Data or information in such
other place as determined by AEMO and specified in the WEM Procedure;
and

xii\. any other processes or requirements relating to the accreditation
of a Facility to provide a Frequency Co-optimised Essential System
Service that AEMO considers are reasonably required to enable it to
perform its functions under this section 2.34A;

\(b\) in respect to RoCoF Ride-Through Capability:

i\. the type and form of supporting information which AEMO may request
from Market Participants and Network Operators;

ii\. the processes AEMO must follow and the matters AEMO must take into
account in determining whether to deem a Facility’s RoCoF Ride-Through
Capability as being equal to the RoCoF Safe Limit under clause
2.34A.12H;

iii\. the processes to be followed by Market Participants and Network
Operators that wish to apply for the accreditation of RoCoF Ride-Through
Capability for its Facility to be determined or re-determined by AEMO;

iv\. the processes to be followed by AEMO to determine or re-determine
the accredited RoCoF Ride-Through Capability for a Facility;

v\. the processes to be followed by AEMO in considering whether to
re-determine the RoCoF Ride-Through Capability accredited to a Facility,
which may include examples of changes to a Facility's performance that
would lead to an adjustment of the RoCoF Ride-Through Capability
accredited to the Facility;

vi\. the processes to be followed by AEMO, Market Participants and
Network Operators for any tests and re-tests of a Facility for the
accreditation, or re-accreditation, of RoCoF Ride-Through Capability for
a Facility; and

vii\. the timeframes, which must be reasonable, for notification
requirements and provision of information, including updating any
Standing Data or information in such other place as determined by AEMO
and specified in the WEM Procedure; and

\(c\) the processes to be followed by AEMO, including a consultation
process with Market Participants and Network Operators, in determining
or re-determining the RoCoF Ride-Through Cost Recovery Limit.

Publication

2.34A.14. AEMO must publish, and keep up to date, the following
information on the WEM Website:

\(a\) for each Facility accredited to provide a Frequency Co-optimised
Essential System Service:

i\. the identity of the Facility;

ii\. the maximum quantity of each Frequency Co-optimised Essential
System Service intended to be provided by the Facility and how that
value would vary under different Facility operating configurations;

iii\. where applicable, the Facility Speed Factor for the Facility; and

\(b\) for each Facility, including a transmission system or distribution
system, for which AEMO has determined a RoCoF Ride-Through Capability
value:

i\. the identity of the Facility; and

ii\. the RoCoF Ride-Through Capability for the Facility.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>The requirement to publish Rule Participant data is relocated from
clause 10.5.1(c) to new clause 2.34B.1 in new section 2.34B as below,
with some minor changes:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>the requirement for AEMO to publish specific contact details such
as a mailing address has been updated to be more generic (clause
2.34B.1(b));</p></li>
<li><p>the requirement for AEMO to publish details of licences held has
been removed as this is on the ERA’s public register; and</p></li>
<li><p>the publication requirements for Intermittent Loads and
Registered Facilities have been updated to more accurately reflect the
information held by AEMO (clauses 2.34B.1(e) and 2.34B.1(f)).</p></li>
</ul></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.34B. Rule Participant Data

2.34B.1. AEMO must publish details of all Rule Participants, including:

\(a\) name;

\(b\) contact details;

\(c\) the name and title of a contact person;

\(d\) applicable Rule Participant classes;

\(e\) names and System Sizes of Registered Facilities; and

\(f\) names of Intermittent Loads and the associated maximum capacity
from the Energy Producing Systems which supply them, as described in
clause 2.30B.3(a).

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Consequential and administrative amendments to 2.35.1 to 2.35.3.</p>
<p>Clause 2.35.4 is further amended to require AEMO to document the
backup processes to be followed where the primary communication and
control system requirements are not available.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

Communications and Systems Requirements

2.35. Dispatch Systems Requirements

2.35.1. Market Participants with Scheduled Facilities, Semi-Scheduled
Facilities and Non-Scheduled Facilities that are not under the direct
control of AEMO must maintain communication systems that enable
communication with AEMO for dispatch of those Registered Facilities.

2.35.2. Market Participants with Registered Facilities to which clause
7.6.28 relates must provide the necessary communication systems for AEMO
to activate and control the level of output of the Registered Facility
as required for it to comply with Dispatch Instructions.

2.35.3. The Rule Participant in respect of an Interruptible Load must
maintain systems to reduce the energy consumption of the Interruptible
Load in response to system frequency changes.

2.35.4. AEMO must document the communications and control system
requirements, including backup communication and control requirements
where the primary methods are unavailable, necessary to support the
dispatch process described in these WEM Rules in a WEM Procedure,
including for issuing Dispatch Instructions.

2.36. AEMO Systems Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.36.1 is amended to replace the specific list of calculations
with more generic wording that will capture all calculations performed
by AEMO via software systems.</p>
<p>This will ensure AEMO applies software management processes for all
market systems which perform calculations that affect market
outcomes.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.36.1. Where AEMO uses software systems to perform calculations of
quantities, prices or amounts defined under these WEM Rules, AEMO must:

\(a\) maintain a record of which version of software was used in
producing each set of results, and maintain records of the details of
the differences between each version and the reasons for the changes
between versions;

\(b\) maintain each version of the software in a state where results
produced with that version can be reproduced for a period of at least
one year from the release date of the last results produced with that
version;

\(c\) ensure that appropriate testing of new software versions is
conducted;

\(d\) ensure that any versions of the software used by AEMO have been
certified as being in compliance with the WEM Rules by an independent
auditor; and

\(e\) require vendors of software audited in accordance with clause
2.36.1(d) to make available to Rule Participants explicit documentation
of the functionality of the software adequate for the purpose of audit.

2.36.2. A “version” of the software referred to in clause 2.36.1 means
any initial software used and any changes to the software that could
have a material effect on the prices or quantities resulting from the
use of the software.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.36.3 is amended to extend the obligation to all Rule
Participants (including Network Operators).</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.36.3. A Rule Participant must ensure that any of its systems which are
linked to AEMO’s systems conform to AEMO’s data and IT security
standards at the point of interface.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.36.4 is amended to extend the obligation to all Rule
Participants (including Network Operators).</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.36.4. A Rule Participant must not deliberately use systems in a manner
that will undermine the operability of those or connected software
systems.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.36.5 is amended to give AEMO the flexibility of centralising
some, or all, of the system requirements in a single WEM Procedure
instead of in the relevant WEM Procedure to which each system
pertains.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.36.5. AEMO must document the data and IT interface requirements,
including security standards in respect of systems required for Market
Participants to operate in the Wholesale Electricity Market in a WEM
Procedure.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>The requirements for AEMO to publish information on the systems it
uses for the STEM and Settlement have been moved from clause 10.5.1(zG)
to new clause 2.36.5A as per below.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.36.5A. AEMO must publish documentation of the functionality of:

\(a\) the STEM Auction software; and

\(b\) the Settlement System Software.

2.36.6. AEMO may require Rule Participants to submit information to AEMO
using software systems that AEMO specifies, and may reject information
submitted by another method.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.36.7 requires AEMO to document information provision
requirements in a WEM Procedure.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.36.7. AEMO must document in a WEM Procedure:

\(a\) arrangements by which Network Operators and AEMO must provide each
other information produced under these WEM Rules;

\(b\) the format, form and manner in which that information must be
provided; and

\(c\) a timeframe for the provision of the information as agreed between
Network Operators and AEMO.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 2.36A is deleted and replaced to include:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>an ability for AEMO to require Rule Participants (being Market
Participants and Network Operators) to install, upgrade and maintain
communication and measuring equipment;</p></li>
<li><p>where a Network Operator is required to install or upgrade SCADA
or high-speed time synchronised data recording equipment at AEMO’s
request, the Network Operator will recover the costs through network
tariffs;</p></li>
<li><p>where a Market Participant is required to install or upgrade
SCADA at their generation sites, the costs will be borne by that Market
Participant;</p></li>
<li><p>a requirement for AEMO to set out in a WEM Procedure the minimum
standards and specifications the communication and measurement
information must adhere to; and</p></li>
<li><p>a requirement for AEMO to consult in good faith with the Network
Operator in the development of the WEM Procedure, giving regard to the
reasonableness of the cost-effectiveness of equipment that may need to
be installed or upgraded.</p></li>
</ul></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.36A. SCADA, Communication and Monitoring Equipment

2.36A.1. AEMO may direct a Rule Participant, in accordance with the WEM
Procedure referred to in clause 2.36A.5, to:

\(a\) install communications or control systems, including interfaces to
communications or control systems, that AEMO considers are adequate to
enable AEMO to remotely monitor the performance of the SWIS (including
its dynamic performance); and

\(b\) upgrade, modify, repair or replace any communications or control
systems already installed in a Facility providing the existing
communications or control systems are, in the reasonable opinion of
AEMO, no longer fit for the intended purpose.

2.36A.2 Where a Facility:

\(a\) is seeking Essential System Service accreditation; or

\(b\) is connected at a location within the Network Operator’s Network
that has demonstrated historical or potential instability or high fault
activity,

and the Facility does not have measurement equipment installed, AEMO
may, acting reasonably, direct a Network Operator to, in accordance with
the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.36A.5, install or upgrade
measurement equipment or systems to enable high resolution
time-synchronised measurement data to be recorded and provided to AEMO.

2.36A.3. If AEMO issues a direction under clause 2.36A.1 or clause
2.36A.2, the Rule Participant must comply with the direction within the
timeframe agreed between the relevant Rule Participant and AEMO or, if
no time is agreed, then within a reasonable time.

2.36A.4. A Rule Participant must operate and maintain equipment in order
to meet and comply with the requirements specified in the WEM Procedure
referred to in clause 2.36A.5.

2.36A.4A. Rule Participants must provide the data or information
specified by AEMO from the equipment in clause 2.36A.1 to AEMO in the
manner and form specified in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause
2.36A.5.

2.36A.5. AEMO must develop a WEM Procedure specifying:

\(a\) the communications and control system requirements, including
backup communication and control requirements where the primary methods
are unavailable, necessary to enable AEMO to remotely monitor the
performance of the SWIS; and;

\(b\) the high-resolution time synchronised data requirements necessary
to enable AEMO to:

i\. accredit a Facility’s Frequency Co-optimised Essential System
Services capability;

ii\. monitor a Facility’s Frequency Co-optimised Essential System
Services response;

iii\. monitor a Facility’s compliance with its Registered Generator
Performance Standards;

iv\. investigate incidents on the SWIS that impact Power System Security
or Power System Reliability or market operation; and

v\. any other matter for which high-resolution time stamped data, where
available, may assist with monitoring the performance of the SWIS;

\(c\) the minimum standards and specifications that the communication
and measuring information must adhere to;

\(d\) the manner in which communications data and measuring information
is to be provided to AEMO; and

\(e\) any other relevant matters required for AEMO to perform its
obligations in respect of this section 2.36A.

2.36A.6. In developing the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.36A.5,
AEMO must:

\(a\) consult in good faith with Network Operators; and

\(b\) give reasonable consideration to the cost-effectiveness of
equipment which the WEM Procedure may require to be installed or
upgraded.

Prudential Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 2.37 is amended to decrease the maximum number of days of
prudential exposure from 70 days to 35 days to reflect the new weekly
settlement timeline and the decreased lag between trading and
settlement.</p>
<p>References to ‘Market Participant’ in clauses 2.37 – 2.43 have been
replaced with ‘Rule Participant’ where necessary to reflect that Western
Power will be liable for RoCoF costs (unless it meets the exemption
criteria – see Appendix 2B) and therefore AEMO must determine the
prudential requirements for Western Power.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.37. Credit Limit

2.37.A1. In this section 2.37, a reference to "Rule Participant" is a
reference to the relevant Market Participant or the relevant Network
Operator as the case may be (and is not a reference to any other Rule
Participant).

2.37.1. AEMO must determine a Credit Limit for each Rule Participant in
accordance with clause 2.37.4.

2.37.2. Subject to clauses 2.37.3 and 2.42.7, AEMO may review and revise
a Rule Participant’s Credit Limit at any time.

2.37.3. AEMO must review each Rule Participant’s Credit Limit at least
once each year.

2.37.4. Subject to clauses 2.37.5 and 2.37.6, the Credit Limit for a
Rule Participant is the dollar amount determined by AEMO as being equal
to the amount that AEMO reasonably expects will not be exceeded over any
35 day period, where this amount is:

\(a\) the maximum net amount owed by the Rule Participant to AEMO over
the 35 day period;

\(b\) determined by applying the factors set out in clause 2.37.5; and

\(c\) calculated in accordance with the WEM Procedure referred to in
clause 2.43.1.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>The amendments to clause 2.37.5 are consequential changes resulting
from the new framework for Essential System Services. No changes are
expected to be made to the calculation of a Market Participant’s Credit
Limit.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.37.5. When determining a Rule Participant’s Credit Limit AEMO must
take into account:

\(a\) in relation to a Market Participant:

i\. the Market Participant’s historical level of payments based on
metered quantity data for the Market Participant, or an estimate of the
Market Participant’s future level of payments based on its expected
generation and consumption quantities where no metered quantity data is
available;

ii\. the Market Participant’s historical level of Bilateral Contract
sale and purchase quantities as reflected in historical Bilateral
Contract submissions, or an estimate of the Market Participant’s
expected level of Bilateral Contract sale and purchase quantities where
no historical Bilateral Contract submission data is available;

iii\. the Market Participant’s historical level of STEM settlement
payments under clause 9.7.2, or an estimate of the Market Participant’s
future level of STEM settlement payments based on its expected STEM
sales and purchases where no historical STEM settlement payment data is
available;

iv\. the Market Participant’s historical level of Reserve Capacity
settlement payments under section 9.8 or an estimate of the Market
Participant’s future level of Reserve Capacity settlement payments based
on its number of Capacity Credits where no historical Reserve Capacity
settlement payment data is available;

v\. the Market Participant’s historical level of Real-Time Energy
settlement payments under clause 9.9.2, or an estimate of the Market
Participant’s future level of Real-Time Energy settlement payments based
on its expected transactions in the Real-Time Market where no historical
Real-Time Energy settlement payment data is available;

vi\. the Market Participant’s historical level of Outage Compensation
settlement payments under clause 9.11.2, or an estimate of the Market
Participant’s future level of Outage Compensation settlement payments
based on its expected level of Outages where no historical Outage
Compensation settlement payment data is available;

vii\. the Market Participant’s historical level of Market Participant
Fee settlement payments under clause 9.12.2, or an estimate of the
Market Participant’s future level of Market Participant Fee settlement
payments based on its expected generation or consumption quantities
where no historical Market Participant Fee settlement payment data is
available;

\(b\) the Rule Participant’s historical level of Essential System
Service settlement payments under clause 9.10.1, or an estimate of the
Rule Participant’s future level of Essential System Service settlement
payments based on its expected Essential System Service provision where
no historical Essential System Service settlement payment data is
available;

\(c\) the length of the settlement cycle; and

\(d\) any other factor that AEMO considers relevant.

2.37.6. In determining a Market Participant’s Credit Limit under clause
2.37.4, AEMO may, to the extent it considers relevant, take into account
a minimum amount that AEMO considers would adequately protect the
Wholesale Electricity Market if a Suspension Event were to occur in
relation to that Market Participant.

2.37.7. AEMO must notify each Rule Participant of its Credit Limit,
including any revised Credit Limit under clause 2.37.2. AEMO must
provide details of the basis for the determination of the Credit Limit
(with references to the factors specified in clause 2.37.5 and the WEM
Procedure referred to in clause 2.43.1).

2.37.8. Where any of the circumstances specified in the WEM Procedure
specified in clause 2.43.1 for the purposes of this clause (which are
circumstances that may result in an increase or decrease in a Rule
Participant’s Credit Limit) have occurred or may occur:

\(a\) the Rule Participant must notify AEMO as soon as practicable if
the circumstance may result in an increase in the Rule Participant’s
Credit Limit; and

\(b\) the Rule Participant may notify AEMO if the circumstance may
result in a decrease in the Rule Participant’s Credit Limit.

2.38. Credit Support

2.38.A1. In this section 2.38, a reference to "Rule Participant" is a
reference to the relevant Market Participant or the relevant Network
Operator as the case may be (and is not a reference to any other Rule
Participant).

2.38.1. A Rule Participant must ensure that, at all times, AEMO holds
the benefit of Credit Support that is:

\(a\) in the form specified in clause 2.38.4; and

\(b\) an amount not less than the most recently determined Credit Limit
for that Rule Participant.

2.38.2. Where a Rule Participant’s existing Credit Support is due to
expire or cease to have effect for any other reason, then that Rule
Participant must ensure that AEMO holds the benefit of replacement
Credit Support that is:

\(a\) in the form specified in clause 2.38.4;

\(b\) an amount not less than the level required under clause 2.38.1(b);
and

\(c\) effective when the existing Credit Support expires or otherwise
ceases to have effect.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.38.3 is amended to remove the existing ambiguity regarding
the circumstances that may require Credit Support to be replaced. Clause
2.43.1 is also amended to require those circumstances to be specified in
the WEM Procedure documented by AEMO in accordance with that
clause.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.38.3 Where a Rule Participant’s Credit Support is affected by any of
the circumstances specified in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause
2.43.1 that may require replacement Credit Support, then the Rule
Participant must ensure that AEMO holds the benefit of replacement
Credit Support that is:

\(a\) in the form specified in clause 2.38.4;

\(b\) an amount not less than the level required under clause 2.38.1(b);
and

\(c\) effective before the end of the next Business Day or within any
longer period approved in writing by AEMO, after the Rule Participant
first becomes aware of the relevant change in circumstance (whether by
reason of the Rule Participant’s own knowledge or a notification by
AEMO).

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.38.4 is amended as a consequence of the amendment to the
Glossary (Chapter 11) to add a definition for “Security
Deposit”.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.38.4. The Credit Support for a Rule Participant must be:

\(a\) an obligation in writing that:

i\. is from a Credit Support provider, who must be an entity which meets
the Acceptable Credit Criteria and which itself is not a Rule
Participant;

ii\. is a guarantee or bank undertaking in a form prescribed by AEMO;

iii\. is duly executed by the Credit Support provider and delivered
unconditionally to AEMO;

iv\. constitutes valid and binding unsubordinated obligations of the
Credit Support provider to pay to AEMO amounts in accordance with its
terms which relate to the relevant Rule Participant’s obligations under
the WEM Rules; and

v\. permits drawings or claims by AEMO up to a stated amount; or

\(b\) a Security Deposit.

2.38.5. Where Credit Support is provided as a Security Deposit in
accordance with clause 2.38.4(b), it will accrue interest daily at the
Bank Bill Rate, and AEMO must pay the Rule Participant the interest
accumulated at the end of each calendar month less any liabilities and
expenses incurred by AEMO, including bank fees and charges.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.38.6(c) is amended to reflect changes made in March 2017 to
the Corporations Act, which removed the definition of
‘externally-administered body corporate’.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.38.6. An entity meets the Acceptable Credit Criteria if it is:

\(a\) either:

i\. under the prudential supervision of the Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority; or

ii\. a central borrowing authority of an Australian State or Territory
which has been established by an Act of Parliament of that State or
Territory;

\(b\) resident in, or has a permanent establishment in, Australia;

\(c\) not a Chapter 5 body corporate (within the meaning of the
Corporations Act), or under a similar form of administration under any
laws applicable to it in any jurisdiction;

\(d\) not immune from suit;

\(e\) capable of being sued in its own name in a court of Australia; and

\(f\) has an acceptable credit rating, being either:

i\. a rating of A-1 or higher for short term unsecured counterparty
obligations of the entity, as rated by Standard and Poor’s (Australia)
Pty. Limited; or

ii\. a rating of P-1 or higher for short term unsecured counterparty
obligations of the entity, as rated by Moodys Investor Services Pty.
Limited.

2.38.7. AEMO must maintain on the WEM Website a list of entities which:

\(a\) AEMO is satisfied, based on evidence provided by Rule Participants
in the previous 12 months, meet the Acceptable Credit Criteria outlined
in clause 2.38.6; or

\(b\) AEMO has determined in its absolute discretion meet the Acceptable
Credit Criteria outlined in clause 2.38.6.

2.38.8 AEMO must monitor the entities included on the list described in
clause 2.38.7 against the requirements in clause 2.38.6 (f).

2.38.9 AEMO may remove the name of an entity from the list described in
clause 2.38.7 at any time if AEMO considers that the entity no longer
meets the Acceptable Credit Criteria defined in clause 2.38.6.

2.39. Trading Limit

2.39.A1. In this section 2.39, a reference to "Rule Participant" is a
reference to the relevant Market Participant or the relevant Network
Operator as the case may be (and is not a reference to any other Rule
Participant).

2.39.1. The Trading Limit for a Rule Participant is to equal the
prudential factor specified in clause 2.39.2 multiplied by the total
amount which can be drawn or claimed under, or applied from, its Credit
Support.

2.39.2. The prudential factor is 0.87.

2.40. Outstanding Amount

2.40.A1. In this section 2.40, a reference to "Rule Participant" is a
reference to the relevant Market Participant or the relevant Network
Operator as the case may be (and is not a reference to any other Rule
Participant).

2.40.1. The Outstanding Amount for a Rule Participant at any time equals
the total amount calculated as follows:

\(a\) the aggregate of the amounts payable by the Rule Participant to
AEMO under these WEM Rules, including amounts for all past periods for
which no Settlement Statement has yet been issued, and whether or not
the payment date has yet been reached; less

\(b\) the aggregate of the amounts payable by AEMO to the Rule
Participant under these WEM Rules, including amounts for all past
periods for which no Settlement Statement has yet been issued, and
whether or not the payment date has yet been reached; less

\(c\) the aggregate of any amounts paid by the Rule Participant to AEMO
for the purpose (to be specified by the Rule Participant in accordance
with the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.43.1) of reducing the
Outstanding Amount and increasing the Trading Margin on each day during
the period from the Trading Day on which the Outstanding Amount is
calculated up to and including either the next Settlement Date.

2.40.2. The amounts to be used for the purposes of making the
calculation under clause 2.40.1(b)(i) and (ii) will be the actual
amounts for which Settlement Statements have been issued by AEMO and
AEMO’s reasonable estimate of other amounts.

2.41. Trading Margin

2.41.A1. In this section 2.41, a reference to "Rule Participant" is a
reference to the relevant Market Participant or the relevant Network
Operator as the case may be (and is not a reference to any other Rule
Participant).

2.41.1. The Trading Margin for a Rule Participant at any time equals the
amount by which its Trading Limit exceeds its Outstanding Amount at that
time.

2.41.2. A Market Participant must not make any submission to AEMO where
the transaction contemplated by the submission, if valued according to
the list of factors referred to in clause 2.41.5, could result in the
Market Participant’s Trading Margin being exceeded.

2.41.3. AEMO may reject any submission from a Market Participant where
in AEMO’s opinion the transaction contemplated by the submission, if
valued according to the list of factors referred to in clause 2.41.5,
could result in the Market Participant’s Trading Margin being exceeded.

2.41.4. AEMO may notify a Rule Participant at any time of the level of
their Trading Margin.

2.41.5. AEMO must publish in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause
2.43.1, a list of factors to be taken into account for determining the
expected value of a transaction. The factors must be consistent with the
methodology that AEMO uses to determine Credit Limits for Rule
Participants.

2.42. Margin Call

2.42.A1. In this section 2.42, a reference to "Rule Participant" is a
reference to the relevant Market Participant or the relevant Network
Operator as the case may be (and is not a reference to any other Rule
Participant).

2.42.1. If, at any time, a Rule Participant’s Trading Margin is less
than zero, then AEMO may issue a Margin Call Notice to the Rule
Participant, specifying the amount of the Margin Call.

2.42.2. \[Blank\]

2.42.3. The amount of the Margin Call must be the amount that will
increase the Rule Participant’s Trading Margin to zero.

2.42.4. A Rule Participant must respond to a Margin Call Notice within
the time specified in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 2.43.1 for
the purposes of this clause, by:

\(a\) paying to AEMO in cleared funds a Security Deposit as contemplated
under clause 2.38.4(b); or

\(b\) ensuring AEMO has the benefit of additional Credit Support of the
kind contemplated by clause 2.38.4(a),

in the amount of the Margin Call.

2.42.5. AEMO may cancel a Margin Call Notice at any time. The
cancellation of a Margin Call Notice does not affect AEMO’s rights to
issue a further Margin Call Notice on the same grounds that gave rise to
the original Margin Call Notice.

2.42.6. Where a Market Participant fails to comply with clause 2.42.4
the provisions of clause 9.19 apply.

2.42.7. AEMO must review a Rule Participant’s Credit Limit within 30
Business Days after issuing a Margin Call Notice to that Rule
Participant.

2.43. Prudential Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 2.43.1 is amended to:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>include amendments consequential to the amendments to 2.38.4(b);
and</p></li>
<li><p>require the WEM Procedure include the circumstances that may
require Credit Support to be replaced for the purposes of clause
2.38.3.</p></li>
</ul></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

2.43.A1. In this section 2.43, a reference to "Rule Participant" is a
reference to the relevant Market Participant or the relevant Network
Operator as the case may be (and is not a reference to any other Rule
Participant).

2.43.1. AEMO must develop a WEM Procedure dealing with:

\(a\) determining Credit Limits;

\(b\) assessing persons against the Acceptable Credit Criteria;

\(c\) Credit Support arrangements, including:

i\. the form of acceptable guarantees and bank letters of credit;

ii\. where and how it will hold Security Deposits and how the costs and
fees of holding Security Deposits will be met;

iiA. the circumstances that may require Credit Support to be replaced
for the purposes of clause 2.38.3; and

iii\. the application of monies drawn from Credit Support in respect of
amounts owed by the relevant Rule Participant to AEMO.

\(d\) calculation of Trading Margins;

\(e\) the list of factors to be taken into account for assessing the
expected value of transactions;

\(f\) issuing of Margin Calls; and

\(g\) other matters relating to clauses 2.37 to 2.42.

Emergency Powers

2.44. Minister’s Emergency Powers

2.44.1. If the Minister requests the Economic Regulation Authority or
AEMO to suspend the application of all or any of these WEM Rules (other
than this section 2.44) or any element of the market in connection with
the exercise of emergency powers under the Energy Operators (Powers) Act
1979 or under emergency provisions of other legislation, then the
Economic Regulation Authority or AEMO, as applicable, must do so.

2.44.2. The Economic Regulation Authority or AEMO, as applicable, must
lift a suspension as soon as practicable after the Minister requests the
Economic Regulation Authority or AEMO to do so.

2.44.3. The Economic Regulation Authority or AEMO, as applicable, must
promptly notify Market Participants of any suspension or lifting of a
suspension.

2.44.4. During a suspension, the Economic Regulation Authority or AEMO,
as applicable, may give directions to Market Participants as to the
operation of the market, and Market Participants must comply with those
directions.

