# 3A. Requirements for Transmission Connected Generating Systems

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.1 sets out the general requirement for a Market
Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System
to comply with Chapter 3A and Appendix 12 unless it is exempted under
section 3A.3. Chapter 3A will only apply to generating works connected
to a transmission system.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.1. General

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.1.1 is intended to be a civil penalty provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.1.1. A Market Participant must comply with each Registered Generator
Performance Standard for a Transmission Connected Generating System from
the time that they:

\(a\) are issued an Approval to Generate Notification; or

\(b\) cease to be an Existing Transmission Connected Generating System
as detailed in clause 1.39.13.

### 3A.1.2. If there is any inconsistency between the provisions of these
WEM Rules (including Appendix 12) and the Technical Rules of the
relevant Network Operator, the provisions of these WEM Rules prevail to
the extent of the inconsistency.

### 3A.1.3. A Network Operator and AEMO must document a process by which
they will provide each other with information, consult with each other,
or reach agreement in respect of the matters in this Chapter 3A and
Appendix 12 including:

\(a\) the requirements for, and manner in which, they will consult with
each other;

\(b\) the format, form and manner in which any information must be
provided; and

\(c\) where these WEM Rules do not provide a timeframe for the provision
of the information, the time by which such information must be provided.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Unregistered generators serving Intermittent Load are subject to
Generator Performance Standards. Clause 3A.1.4 clarifies the responsible
Market Participant.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.1.4. Where the person who owns, controls, or operates a Facility
containing an unregistered Energy Producing System supplying an
Intermittent Load, that is and continues to be deemed to be an
Intermittent Load under clause 1.48.2, is exempted from the requirement
in clause 2.30B.8 to make a new application under clause 2.30B.5 for the
Load to be treated as an Intermittent Load based on clause 2.30B.8A, the
person's Intermediary is responsible for that Transmission Connected
Generating System.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.1.5 is added to provide guidance to Participants on how
AEMO and Western Power will determine the maximum temperature for a
Transmission Connected Generating System under Appendix 12.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.1.5. AEMO must:

\(a\) in consultation with the Network Operator, prepare guidelines on
how AEMO determines the maximum temperature as defined in Appendix 12;
and

\(b\) publish those guidelines on the WEM Website.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.1.6 is added to require AEMO or Western Power, as
applicable, to undertake a public consultation process to obtain
stakeholder feedback and to respond to the issues raised in submissions
received.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.1.6. In developing, amending or replacing a guideline in accordance
with clauses 3A.1.5, 3A.4.4 or 3A.13.2, AEMO or the Network Operator, as
applicable, must:

\(a\) publish, together with the proposed guideline, or the amendment or
replacement of it, as applicable, a call for submissions, and the
closing date for submissions must not be less than 15 Business Days from
the date the proposed or revised guideline is published; and

\(b\) publish, together with the final guideline, a summary of the
submissions received and the response of AEMO or the Network Operator,
as applicable, to the issues raised in those submissions.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.2 sets out the general requirements on Market Participants
to provide relevant information. Section 3A.2 includes an obligation on
a Market Participant to ensure that its generation system model
(required under Appendix 12) complies with the WEM Procedure developed
by the Network Operator. If the WEM Procedure is amended then the Market
Participant must ensure that its generation system model complies with
the amended WEM Procedure. When a Network Operator amends the WEM
Procedure it will also specify a time by when the Market Participant
must comply with the amended WEM Procedure.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.2. General Requirements to Provide Relevant Information

### 3A.2.1. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System must provide all data and information reasonably
required by a Network Operator or AEMO under this Chapter 3A and
relevant provisions under Appendix 12 to assess the impact of a
Transmission Connected Generating System on the performance and security
of the transmission system and distribution system.

### 3A.2.2. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System must ensure that the generation system model referred
to in Appendix 12 complies with the requirements specified in the WEM
Procedure of the relevant Network Operator referred to in clause 3A.4.2.

### 3A.2.3. Where the requirements for the generation system model are
amended in the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 3A.4.2, a Market
Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System
must ensure that the generation system model used by the Market
Participant complies with the amended requirements within the timeframes
specified in the WEM Procedure for compliance with the amended
requirements.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.3 sets out a mechanism for a Network Operator to exempt a
Transmission Connected Generating System from the requirements of
Chapter 3A. The section recognises that the compliance costs would
outweigh the benefits of applying the regime to certain generating
works, such as smaller generators.</p>
<p>The exemption regime will exempt a generating system from section
### 3A.1, section 3A.2, sections 3A.5 to 3A.12 and Appendix 12. An exemption
notice may only be revoked where the generating system is undertaking a
Relevant Generator Modification. An exempt generating system will still
be required to comply with the Technical Rules.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.3. Exempt Transmission Connected Generating Systems

### 3A.3.1. A Network Operator may, by written notice, exempt a Market
Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System
from all of the requirements of section 3A.1, section 3A.2, sections
### 3A.5 to 3A.12 and Appendix 12 in respect of a Transmission Connected
Generating System (Exempt Transmission Connected Generating System)
where the Network Operator and AEMO agree that the cost incurred by the
Market Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating
System to comply with Chapter 3A and Appendix 12 is reasonably likely to
outweigh the benefit of requiring the Market Participant to comply
having regard to:

\(a\) the potential of the Transmission Connected Generating System to
adversely affect Power System Security or Power System Reliability; and

\(b\) the effect the proposed exemption will, if granted, have on other
Market Participants.

### 3A.3.2. An exemption notice issued under clause 3A.3.1 must be provided
to the Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System and the relevant Network Operator must keep a record
of each exemption notice issued.

### 3A.3.3. A Network Operator may revoke an exemption notice issued under
clause 3A.3.1 by written notice to a Market Participant responsible for
the Exempt Transmission Connected Generating System where a Relevant
Generator Modification is proposed to be undertaken in respect of the
Exempt Transmission Connected Generating System.

### 3A.3.4. Where an exemption notice issued under clause 3A.3.1 is revoked
under clause 3A.3.3, section 3A.14 applies.

### 3A.3.5. A Network Operator must notify the Economic Regulation Authority
when it issues an exemption notice under clause 3A.3.1 or revokes an
exemption notice under clause 3A.3.3.

### 3A.3.6. The Economic Regulation Authority must publish a list of Exempt
Transmission Connected Generating Systems and update that list when it
is notified by a Network Operator under clause 3A.3.5.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.4 sets out general obligations of a Network Operator. It
will require a Network Operator to ensure its connection processes are
consistent with Chapter 3A. It provides a head of power for a Network
Operator to create a WEM Procedure in respect of the requirements for a
Market Participant's generation system model.</p>
<p>It also creates a head of power for a Network Operator to issue
guidelines as to how it will assess generator performance
standards.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.4. General Obligations of a Network Operator

### 3A.4.1. A Network Operator must ensure its connection process as it
relates to Transmission Connected Generating Systems for which a Market
Participant is responsible is consistent with this Chapter 3A.

### 3A.4.2. A Network Operator must develop and maintain a WEM Procedure
that addresses the requirements of the generation system model referred
to section 17 of Appendix 12.

### 3A.4.3. The WEM Procedure referred to in clause 3A.4.2, must specify the
timeframes by which the Market Participant must ensure that the
generation system model referred to in section 17 of Appendix 12,
complies with each amended requirement of the generation system model as
specified in the WEM Procedure.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.4.4. is amended to require the network operator to prepare
assessment guidelines in consultation with AEMO, and to publish them on
its website and to provide guidance for Participants on what information
needs to be included in their submissions.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.4.4. A Network Operator must:

\(a\) prepare guidelines in consultation with AEMO, to provide
information to Market Participants as to how the standard or technical
level of performance in respect of each Technical Requirement will be
assessed, and the information that must be included in submissions for
Proposed Generator Performance Standards, for each type of generating
unit; and

\(b\) publish those guidelines on its website.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.5 sets out the approval process and negotiation framework
for determining generator performance standards for Market Participants
wishing to connect generating systems to the transmission network. The
applicable standards are set out as Technical Requirements under
Appendix 12. For most Technical Requirements, there is an Ideal
Generator Performance Standard and a Minimum Generator Performance
Standard. The Network Operator must accept a Proposed Generator
Performance Standard that meets the Ideal Generator Performance Standard
and must reject any proposed standard below the Minimum Generator
Performance Standard. Where a Proposed Generator Performance Standard is
between the range of minimum and ideal, the generator must adequately
justify why it cannot achieve the Ideal Generator Performance Standard.
The Network Operator must consult with AEMO on any negotiated standard
that it is likely to accept, and is not permitted to accept the standard
unless AEMO also agrees. If rejecting a Proposed Generator Performance
Standard, the Network Operator and AEMO must provide reasons.</p>
<p>A Market Participant may propose a Trigger Event. If an approved
Trigger Event occurs then the Market Participant must comply with the
conditions of the Trigger Event.</p>
<p>Once approved, the generator performance standards for a Transmission
Connected Generating System must be recorded on the Generator
Register.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.5. Generator Performance Standards for Transmission Connected
Generating Systems

### 3A.5.1. Where a Market Participant responsible for generating works
intends to connect those generating works to a transmission system, the
Market Participant must submit to the relevant Network Operator,
Proposed Generator Performance Standards for the generating works as if
the generating works were a Transmission Connected Generating System
addressing each Technical Requirement.

### 3A.5.2. Each Proposed Generator Performance Standard submitted under
clause 3A.5.1 or clause 3A.14.1(a) must meet the Common Requirements
and:

\(a\) be equal to or better than the Ideal Generator Performance
Standard; or

\(b\) if a Proposed Negotiated Generator Performance Standard is
submitted:

i\. be no less onerous than the Minimum Performance Standard;

ii\. demonstrate any applicable Negotiation Criteria have been met;

iii\. meet the requirements of clause 3A.5.5; and

iv\. if applicable, meet the requirements of clause 3A.5.6.

### 3A.5.3. The Network Operator must not approve a Proposed Generator
Performance Standard that does not meet or demonstrate the applicable
criteria listed in clause 3A.5.2.

### 3A.5.4. The Network Operator is not required to consult AEMO and must
approve a Proposed Generator Performance Standard that is equal to or
better than the Ideal Generator Performance Standard for a Technical
Requirement.

### 3A.5.5. A Proposed Negotiated Generator Performance Standard must be as
consistent as practicable with the corresponding Ideal Generator
Performance Standard for that Technical Requirement, having regard to:

\(a\) the need to protect the Transmission Connected Generating System
from damage;

\(b\) power system conditions at the location of the connection or
proposed connection; and

\(c\) the commercial and technical feasibility of complying with the
Ideal Generator Performance Standard.

### 3A.5.6. A Proposed Negotiated Generator Performance Standard may include
a Trigger Event which must address:

\(a\) the conditions for determining whether the Trigger Event has
occurred;

\(b\) the party responsible for determining whether the Trigger Event
has occurred;

\(c\) the actions required to be taken and any revised standard or
technical level of performance in respect of a Technical Requirement
which must be achieved if the Trigger Event occurs;

\(d\) the maximum timeframe for compliance with any action required to
be taken and each revised standard or technical level of performance in
respect of a Technical Requirement following the Trigger Event;

\(e\) any requirements to provide information and supporting evidence
required by the Network Operator or AEMO to demonstrate that, if the
Trigger Event occurs, the actions required will occur and will deliver
the agreed outcome and level of performance required by any revised
standard or technical level of performance in respect of a Technical
Requirement;

\(f\) any testing requirements to verify compliance with each revised
standard or technical level of performance in respect of a Technical
Requirement; and

\(g\) any requirements necessary to verify that the actions required to
be taken have occurred if the Trigger Event occurs.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.5.7 is intended to be a civil penalty provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.5.7. If a Registered Generator Performance Standard includes a
Trigger Event and the Trigger Event subsequently occurs, the Market
Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating System
must comply with the requirements of the Trigger Event.

### 3A.5.8. A Trigger Event contained in a Registered Generator Performance
Standard may be modified by written agreement between the Market
Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating
System, AEMO and the relevant Network Operator. For the avoidance of
doubt, the process that applies to a Proposed Negotiated Generator
Performance Standard in this section 3A.5 does not apply to the
modification of a Trigger Event contained in a Registered Generator
Performance Standard under this clause 3A.5.8.

### 3A.5.9. If a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System submits to the Network Operator a Proposed Negotiated
Generator Performance Standard under clause 3A.5.1 or clause 3A.14.1(a),
the Market Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected
Generating System must provide to the relevant Network Operator:

\(a\) the reasons and supporting evidence why the Market Participant
responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating System cannot meet
the Ideal Generator Performance Standard; and

\(b\) any information and supporting evidence required by the Network
Operator setting out the reasons why the Proposed Negotiated Generator
Performance Standard is appropriate, including:

i\. how the Proposed Negotiated Generator Performance Standard meets the
applicable criteria listed in clause 3A.5.2; and

ii\. how the Market Participant responsible for the Transmission
Connected Generating System has taken into account each of the matters
listed in clause 3A.5.5.

### 3A.5.10. If, following the receipt of a Proposed Negotiated Generator
Performance Standard and the information and evidence referred to in
clause 3A.5.9, the Network Operator reasonably considers it will approve
the Proposed Negotiated Generator Performance Standard, the Network
Operator, in accordance with the process agreed under clause 3A.1.3,
must:

\(a\) provide the information received from the Market Participant
responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating System under
clause 3A.5.9 to AEMO; and

\(b\) use best endeavours to consult with AEMO within a reasonable
timeframe in relation to each Proposed Negotiated Generator Performance
Standard.

### 3A.5.11. AEMO must use best endeavours to respond in a reasonable
timeframe after being consulted in accordance with clause 3A.5.10 and
provide a recommendation to the Network Operator whether a Proposed
Negotiated Generator Performance Standard should be approved or rejected
by the Network Operator, or whether AEMO requires further information to
make the recommendation in accordance with the process agreed under
clause 3A.1.3.

### 3A.5.12. Where AEMO requires further information that it considers
necessary to make the recommendation in clause 3A.5.11, the Network
Operator, in accordance with the process agreed under clause 3A.1.3,
must:

\(a\) provide the further information that is in its possession, power
or control; or

\(b\) use reasonable endeavours to obtain that information from the
Market Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating
System and provide that information to AEMO.

### 3A.5.13. In making a recommendation whether a Proposed Negotiated
Generator Performance Standard should be approved or rejected in
accordance with clause 3A.5.11, AEMO is not limited to considering
information provided by the Network Operator and may use any other
relevant information available to it.

### 3A.5.14. AEMO must recommend that the Network Operator reject a Proposed
Negotiated Generator Performance Standard in accordance with clause
### 3A.5.11 if it reasonably considers that the Proposed Negotiated
Generator Performance Standard may adversely affect Power System
Security or Power System Reliability.

### 3A.5.15. Where AEMO recommends that the Network Operator reject a
Proposed Negotiated Generator Performance Standard in accordance with
clause 3A.5.11, AEMO must:

\(a\) provide written reasons to the Network Operator; and

\(b\) in respect of the relevant Technical Requirement, recommend that
either:

i\. if applicable, an alternative Proposed Negotiated Generator
Performance Standard that AEMO considers meets the requirements of
clause 3A.5.2(b), which may include a Trigger Event, is adopted; or

ii\. otherwise, the Ideal Generator Performance Standard is adopted.

### 3A.5.16. Subject to clause 3A.5.17, after a Network Operator has
received the recommendation from AEMO under clause 3A.5.11, the Network
Operator must determine whether to approve or reject each Proposed
Negotiated Generator Performance Standard proposed by the Market
Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating
System.

### 3A.5.17. A Network Operator must reject a Proposed Negotiated Generator
Performance Standard in accordance with clause 3A.5.16 where:

\(a\) in the Network Operator’s reasonable opinion:

i\. one or more of the requirements in clause 3A.5.2(b); or

ii\. in the case of a Relevant Generator Modification, one or more of
the requirements in clause 3A.14.1,

are not met;

\(b\) AEMO has recommended in accordance with clause 3A.5.11 that the
Network Operator reject the Proposed Negotiated Generator Performance
Standard; or

\(c\) in the Network Operator’s reasonable opinion, the Proposed
Negotiated Generator Performance Standard will adversely affect:

i\. Power System Security;

ii\. Power System Reliability;

iii\. Power Transfer Capability; or

iv\. the quality of supply of electricity for other users of the
Network.

### 3A.5.18. If a Network Operator rejects a Proposed Negotiated Generator
Performance Standard in accordance with clause 3A.5.16, the Network
Operator must provide to the Market Participant responsible for the
Transmission Connected Generating System:

\(a\) written reasons for the rejection; and

\(b\) if applicable, an alternative Proposed Negotiated Generator
Performance Standard that the Network Operator and AEMO consider meets
the requirements of clause 3A.5.2(b), which may include a Trigger Event.

### 3A.5.19. The Market Participant responsible for the Transmission
Connected Generating System may, in relation to an alternative Proposed
Negotiated Generator Performance Standard provided by the Network
Operator in accordance with clause 3A.5.18(b), either:

\(a\) accept the alternative Proposed Negotiated Generator Performance
Standard; or

\(b\) reject the alternative Proposed Negotiated Generator Performance
Standard; and

i\. propose a different alternative Proposed Negotiated Generator
Performance Standard consistent with the requirements of clause
### 3A.5.2(b), which may include a Trigger Event, in which case the process
for consideration and approval of Proposed Generator Performance
Standards in this section 3A.5 applies; or

ii\. elect to adopt the Ideal Generator Performance Standard for the
relevant Technical Requirement.

### 3A.5.20. When a Proposed Generator Performance Standard is approved in
accordance with clause 3A.5.4, clause 3A.5.16, or accepted by the Market
Participant under clause 3A.5.19(a), it must be recorded by the relevant
Network Operator on the Generator Register and it will be a Registered
Generator Performance Standard for that Transmission Connected
Generating System.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.6 sets out the submission and approval process for
Generator Monitoring Plans, including AEMO's obligations and rights in
approving or rejecting a Generator Monitoring Plan and the obligations
for a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System to:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>monitor its compliance with the Registered Generator Performance
Standards for the Transmission Connected Generation System; and</p></li>
<li><p>undertake testing and monitoring activities,</p></li>
</ul>
<p>in accordance with the Generator Monitoring Plan proposed by the
Market Participant and approved by AEMO and included in the Generator
Register for the Transmission Connected Generating System.</p>
<p>AEMO has an obligation to develop and maintain a WEM Procedure which
includes a Template Generator Monitoring Plan and the processes
associated with the approval of monitoring plans and reporting of
non-compliances.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.6. Generator Monitoring Plans

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.6.1 is intended to be a civil penalty provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.6.1. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System must:

\(a\) monitor its compliance with the Registered Generator Performance
Standards for the Transmission Connected Generating System;

\(b\) once issued an Approval to Generate Notification, have a Generator
Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO for the Transmission Connected
Generating System at all times; and

\(c\) comply with the Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO for the
Transmission Connected Generating System on and from the date specified
in the Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.6.2(a) requires AEMO to specify certain requirements
relating to the content of a Generator Monitoring Plan in a WEM
Procedure. The requirements are currently referred to as a “Template
Generator Monitoring Plan”. However, this name is misleading because the
requirements do not constitute a template. AEMO intends to publish a
template-like document in Microsoft Word to assist Market Participants
in preparing their Generator Monitoring Plans, but does not intend to
include that template in the WEM Procedure.</p>
<p>Clause 3A.6.2(a) is therefore amended to replace the name “Template
Generator Monitoring Plan” with “Generator Monitoring Plan
Requirements”. Additionally, clause 3A.6.2(aA) is inserted to require
AEMO to include in the WEM Procedure details of the process to be used
by Market Participants to submit a proposed Generator Monitoring Plan
(which is expected to involve the use of the published
template).</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.6.2. AEMO must develop and maintain a WEM Procedure which includes:

\(a\) the following requirements relating to the content of a Generator
Monitoring Plan (“**Generator Monitoring Plan Requirements**”):

i\. how a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System must monitor performance against the applicable
Registered Generator Performance Standards including any testing and
verification requirements;

ii\. the record keeping obligations relating to monitoring compliance
with Registered Generator Performance Standards; and

iii\. the information and data provision obligations a Market
Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System
must comply with when requested by AEMO, the Network Operator or the
Economic Regulation Authority, including the form by which that
information and data must be provided;

(aA) the process a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission
Connected Generating System must follow to submit a proposed Generator
Monitoring Plan to AEMO;

\(b\) the assessment and approval process to be followed by AEMO for a
proposed Generator Monitoring Plan submitted by a Market Participant
responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System;

\(c\) the process by which a Market Participant responsible for a
Transmission Connected Generating System must report any alleged
non-compliance or suspected non-compliance with the applicable
Registered Generator Performance Standards and the applicable Generator
Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO;

\(d\) the process by which a Market Participant responsible for a
Transmission Connected Generating System must report that it has not met
or complied with, or may not be able to meet or comply with an approved
Rectification Plan in accordance with clause 3A.11.9; and

\(e\) the process by which a Market Participant responsible for a
Transmission Connected Generating System must submit proposed updates
and amendments to a Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO and the
assessment process to be followed by AEMO for such updates and
amendments.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.6.3 is updated to reflect the revised Market Information
Framework. Rule Participant Network Restricted means information is
available to a relevant Network Operator, a Delegate, AEMO, the
Coordinator, the Electricity Review Board, the Economic Regulation
Authority, other regulators and the specific Rule Participant. Under the
Confidential Information classification these parties will still be able
to access this information as necessary.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.6.3. Generator Monitoring Plans and information relating to Generator
Monitoring Plans including outcomes, reporting data and supporting
evidence relating to a Generator Monitoring Plan are all Confidential
Information.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clauses 3A.6.4, 3A.6.5, 3A.6.6 and 3A.6.9 are amended to replace
“Template Generator Monitoring Plan” with “Generator Monitoring Plan
Requirements”.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.6.4. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System must submit a proposed Generator Monitoring Plan to
AEMO for approval in accordance with any requirements for submission in
the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 3A.6.2 for each Transmission
Connected Generating System that either:

\(a\) meets the Generator Monitoring Plan Requirements as applicable to
the Transmission Connected Generating System; or

\(b\) meets the Generator Monitoring Plan Requirements as applicable to
the Transmission Connected Generating System, other than in respect of
variations that the Market Participant reasonably considers are required
on the basis that compliance is not possible, or where doing so would
impose unreasonable costs on the Market Participant.

### 3A.6.5. AEMO must approve a proposed Generator Monitoring Plan if:

\(a\) it meets the Generator Monitoring Plan Requirements as applicable
to the Transmission Connected Generating System; or

\(b\) AEMO considers any variations from the Generator Monitoring Plan
Requirements as applicable to the Transmission Connected Generating
System are:

i\. required on the basis that compliance is not possible, or where
doing so would impose unreasonable costs on the Market Participant; and

ii\. not likely to endanger the safety of any person, damage equipment
or breach any applicable law, or pose a threat to Power System Security
or Power System Reliability.

### 3A.6.6. AEMO may reject a proposed Generator Monitoring Plan if AEMO
reasonably considers that:

\(a\) the proposed Generator Monitoring Plan does not meet the
requirements of clause 3A.6.5(a);

\(b\) the proposed Generator Monitoring Plan is likely to pose a safety
risk or threat to Power System Security or Power System Reliability; or

\(c\) any proposed variations from the Generator Monitoring Plan
Requirements as applicable to the Transmission Connected Generating
System do not meet the requirements of clause 3A.6.5(b).

### 3A.6.7. AEMO may, but is not required to, consult the relevant Network
Operator in respect of a proposed Generator Monitoring Plan submitted to
AEMO for approval under clause 3A.6.4 or clause 3A.14.1(b).

### 3A.6.8. Where AEMO rejects a proposed Generator Monitoring Plan in
accordance with clause 3A.6.6, AEMO:

\(a\) must provide to the Market Participant responsible for the
Transmission Connected Generating System written reasons for the
rejection; and

\(b\) may request amendments to the proposed Generator Monitoring Plan
that it considers are required to meet the requirements of clause
### 3A.6.5(a) or clause 3A.6.5(b) as the case may be.

### 3A.6.9. If the Generator Monitoring Plan Requirements as applicable to a
Transmission Connected Generating System is amended, the Market
Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating System
must submit an amended proposed Generator Monitoring Plan to AEMO for
approval in accordance with clause 3A.6.4 within six months of the
amendment to the Generator Monitoring Plan Requirements taking effect.

### 3A.6.10. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System may submit an amended proposed Generator Monitoring
Plan to AEMO for approval at any time in accordance with the WEM
Procedure referred to in clause 3A.6.2.

### 3A.6.11. Where a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission
Connected Generating System submits an amended proposed Generator
Monitoring Plan to AEMO for approval in accordance with clause 3A.6.9 or
clause 3A.6.10, then clauses 3A.6.5 to 3A.6.8 apply.

### 3A.6.12. Where AEMO approves a Generator Monitoring Plan, AEMO must
provide:

\(a\) notification of its approval of a Generator Monitoring Plan to the
Market Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating
System; and

\(b\) each Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO to the relevant
Network Operator, and the Network Operator must update the Generator
Register to include the most recent Generator Monitoring Plan approved
by AEMO.

### 3A.6.13. Subject to clause 3A.6.14 and clause 3A.6.15, the Economic
Regulation Authority, AEMO or the relevant Network Operator may request
that a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System provide the outcomes, reporting data and supporting
evidence in respect of a Generator Monitoring Plan that has been
approved by AEMO.

### 3A.6.14. AEMO may only request the information described in clause
### 3A.6.13 from a Market Participant if AEMO reasonably considers that the
information will assist it to meet any of its functions or discharge any
of its obligations under these WEM Rules.

### 3A.6.15. A Network Operator may only request the information described
in clause 3A.6.13 from a Market Participant if the Network Operator
reasonably considers that the information will assist it to meet any of
its functions or discharge any of its obligations under these WEM Rules.

### 3A.6.16. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System must provide the outcomes, reporting data and
supporting evidence relating to a Generator Monitoring Plan within five
Business Days, or longer period if agreed, of a request by the Economic
Regulation Authority, AEMO or the Network Operator made in accordance
with clause 3A.6.13.

### 3A.6.17. Nothing in this Chapter 3A prevents AEMO, the Economic
Regulation Authority or the relevant Network Operator from undertaking
monitoring activities in respect of compliance with the Registered
Generator Performance Standards for a Transmission Connected Generating
System.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.7 requires a Network Operator to maintain a register
(Generator Register) of approved generator performance standards for
each Transmission Connected Generating System connected to its Network.
Generator Registers are to be made available to AEMO, Market
Participants (as relevant) and the Economic Regulation Authority.</p>
<p>Generator Registers will also include the approved Generator
Monitoring Plan for each Transmission Connected Generating System
connected to the Network Operator's Network.</p>
<p>Market Participants are required to provide requested information
reasonably required for the purpose of a Network Operator establishing
and maintaining the Generator Register and notification requirements of
Market Participants to ensure the currency and accuracy of the Generator
Register.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.7. Generator Register

### 3A.7.1. A Network Operator must establish and maintain a register of
each Registered Generator Performance Standard for each Transmission
Connected Generating System connected to its Network (Generator
Register).

### 3A.7.2. A Market Participant must provide the relevant Network Operator
any information requested and reasonably required by the Network
Operator to establish and maintain a Generator Register in accordance
with this section 3A.7.

### 3A.7.3. A Generator Register may include any information considered
relevant by the Network Operator and must record, at a minimum, for each
Transmission Connected Generating System other than an Exempt
Transmission Connected Generating System:

\(a\) the status of connection of the generating works to the relevant
Network;

\(b\) details of the Facility and the Market Participant responsible for
the Transmission Connected Generating System including the registered
name of the Facility and the Market Participant's registered name;

\(c\) full details of each Registered Generator Performance Standard for
each generating unit or component of the generating works forming part
of the Transmission Connected Generating System, including Trigger
Events;

\(d\) the generation system model used and provided by the Market
Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating System
and referred to in clause 3A.2.2; and

\(e\) each Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO.

### 3A.7.4. A Network Operator must update the Generator Register:

\(a\) in respect of a proposed Transmission Connected Generating System
after the Arrangement for Access has been executed by all relevant
parties and prior to an Interim Approval to Generate Notification being
issued for the proposed Transmission Connected Generating System; and

\(b\) as required from time to time when the information referred to in
clause 3A.7.2 is updated or otherwise to ensure it remains accurate and
up to date.

### 3A.7.5. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System must notify the relevant Network Operator as soon as
reasonably practicable of:

\(a\) any changes in respect of the:

i\. generating works;

ii\. Registered Generator Performance Standards;

iii\. generation system model;

iv\. Market Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected
Generating System; or

\(b\) any other information in respect of the Transmission Connected
Generating System,

that would render the information (other than the Generator Monitoring
Plan approved by AEMO), recorded in the Generator Register being
inaccurate or out of date.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.7.6 is updated to reflect the revised Market Information
Framework. Rule Participant Network Restricted means information is
available to a relevant Network Operator, a Delegate, AEMO, the
Coordinator, the Electricity Review Board, the Economic Regulation
Authority, other regulators and the specific Rule Participant. Under the
Confidential Information classification these parties will still be able
to access this information as necessary.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.7.6. A Generator Register is Confidential Information.

### 3A.7.7 A Network Operator must make the Generator Register available to:

\(a\) AEMO in accordance with the process agreed pursuant to clause
### 3A.1.3;

\(b\) a Market Participant, but only in respect of the information that
relates to a Transmission Connected Generating System the Market
Participant is responsible for; and

\(c\) the Economic Regulation Authority.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.8 prohibits a Market Participant responsible for a
Transmission Connected Generating System from generating electricity
without an approved Commissioning Test Plan unless it has been issued
with an Interim Approval to Generate Notification (with or without
conditions) or an Approval to Generate Notification.</p>
<p>The section sets out the circumstances in which a Network Operator
may exercise its discretion to issue an Interim Approval to Generate
Notification (including to issue any conditions) with the approval of
AEMO.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.8. Commissioning, Interim Approval to Generate Notification and
Approval to Generate Notification

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.8.1 is intended to be a civil penalty provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.8.1. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System must not generate electricity without an approved
Commissioning Test Plan unless it has a valid Interim Approval to
Generate Notification (with or without conditions) or an Approval to
Generate Notification.

### 3A.8.2. A Network Operator may only issue an Interim Approval to
Generate Notification without conditions to a Market Participant
responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System, where the
Network Operator and AEMO consider the Transmission Connected Generating
System has not demonstrated non-compliance based on observed performance
with the applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards and there
are no observed risks to Power System Security or Power System
Reliability.

### 3A.8.3. Subject to clause 3A.8.4, a Network Operator may, in its
discretion and with the approval of AEMO:

\(a\) issue an Interim Approval to Generate Notification with conditions
to a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System; or

\(b\) place conditions on an Interim Approval to Generate Notification
issued under clause 3A.8.2.

### 3A.8.4. A Network Operator may only issue and place conditions on an
Interim Approval to Generate Notification under clause 3A.8.3 where AEMO
and the Network Operator:

\(a\) either:

i\. do not consider the Transmission Connected Generating System is
demonstrating compliance based on observed performance with the
applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards; or

ii\. consider that conditions are required to mitigate any observed
risks to Power System Security or Power System Reliability; and

\(b\) consider the Transmission Connected Generating System is
reasonably likely to resolve any performance issues and be compliant
with the applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards in the
future.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.8.5(a) is intended to be a civil penalty
provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.8.5. Prior to being issued an Approval to Generate Notification, if a
Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating
System is not meeting the applicable Registered Generator Performance
Standards or complying with the applicable conditions, the Market
Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating System
must:

\(a\) immediately notify AEMO and provide details of the non-compliance;
and

\(b\) either:

i\. make any modification required to comply with the conditions and
meet the applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards within
the timeframe specified by the Network Operator or, if a Rectification
Plan is required under clause 3A.8.7, within the timeframe specified in
the approved Rectification Plan; or

ii\. as soon as practicable request to renegotiate any applicable
Registered Generator Performance Standards it is unable to meet in which
case clause 3A.8.8 applies.

### 3A.8.6. Where AEMO is notified under clause 3A.8.5(a), AEMO must advise
the relevant Network Operator as soon as reasonably practicable.

### 3A.8.7. Where a Network Operator is notified under clause 3A.8.6, the
Network Operator may, with the approval of AEMO, require a Market
Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating System
to submit a Rectification Plan for approval in accordance with section
### 3A.11.

### 3A.8.8. A Network Operator may, in its discretion and with the approval
of AEMO, agree to a request made under clause 3A.8.5(b)(ii) to
renegotiate a Registered Generator Performance Standard for a
Transmission Connected Generating System where the Network Operator and
AEMO agree the Market Participant responsible for the Transmission
Connected Generating System will be able to meet and comply with an
alternative standard or technical level of performance in respect of the
Technical Requirement that meets the applicable criteria listed in
clause 3A.5.2, in which case the process for consideration and approval
of Proposed Generator Performance Standards in section 3A.5 applies.

### 3A.8.9. If a Network Operator refuses a request made under clause
### 3A.8.5(b)(ii) to renegotiate a Registered Generator Performance Standard
for a Transmission Connected Generating System or an alternative
standard or technical level of performance in respect of the Technical
Requirement cannot be agreed between the Network Operator, AEMO and the
Market Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating
System, the Market Participant must comply with the applicable
Registered Generator Performance Standards previously approved as
recorded in the Generator Register within the timeframe specified by the
Network Operator.

### 3A.8.10. A Network Operator may, with AEMO's approval, revoke an Interim
Approval to Generate Notification issued under clause 3A.8.2 or clause
### 3A.8.3 where the Network Operator reasonably considers that:

\(a\) the performance of the Transmission Connected Generating System
differs from the applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards;
or

\(b\) the conditions placed on an Interim Approval to Generate
Notification have not been met or complied with,

and the Market Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected
Generating System has not complied with the requirements in clause
### 3A.8.5(b).

### 3A.8.11. A Network Operator must issue an Approval to Generate
Notification to a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission
Connected Generating System where:

\(a\) a Generator Monitoring Plan for the Transmission Connected
Generating System has been approved by AEMO under clause 3A.6.5 and the
Network Operator has included it in the Generator Register;

\(b\) the operational performance of the Transmission Connected
Generating System is considered satisfactory to both the Network
Operator and AEMO; and

\(c\) AEMO and the Network Operator consider the Market Participant
responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating System has met the
requirements of, and indicated compliance with, the applicable
Registered Generator Performance Standards in accordance with the WEM
Procedure referred to in clause 3A.9.1.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.9 provides a head of power for AEMO to create a WEM
Procedure which sets out testing requirements and compliance
verification mechanisms in relation to Registered Generator Performance
Standards and Generator Monitoring Plans. The section enables AEMO to
request a Market Participant to undertake testing in accordance with the
WEM Procedure should AEMO or the relevant Network Operator reasonably
consider that a Market Participant may not be compliant with the
applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards.</p>
<p>The section also requires that a Market Participant provides any
information and data requested to enable compliance monitoring and
testing to be undertaken.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.9. Testing and Compliance

### 3A.9.1. AEMO must develop and maintain a WEM Procedure which sets out
the testing requirements and how compliance with:

\(a\) Registered Generator Performance Standards will be verified,
including tests required before an Interim Approval to Generate
Notification and an Approval to Generate Notification is issued; and

\(b\) a Generator Monitoring Plan is measured and verified.

### 3A.9.2. Where AEMO reasonably considers a Market Participant responsible
for a Transmission Connected Generating System may not be compliant with
the applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards, it must
notify the Market Participant and request an explanation from the Market
Participant.

### 3A.9.3. The Market Participant must submit the explanation requested
under clause 3A.9.2 within five Business Days of receiving the request
unless a longer period is agreed by AEMO.

### 3A.9.4. AEMO must consider the explanation and, if it is not satisfied
with the explanation, AEMO may require the Market Participant to
undertake testing in accordance with the WEM Procedure referred to in
clause 3A.9.1 to determine whether the Transmission Connected Generating
System is compliant with the applicable Registered Generator Performance
Standard.

### 3A.9.5. Where AEMO requires a Market Participant responsible for a
Transmission Connected Generating System to undertake testing under
clause 3A.9.4, the Market Participant must use best endeavours to agree
an appropriate timeframe with AEMO for the testing to occur in
accordance with the WEM Procedure referred to in clause 3A.9.1.

### 3A.9.6. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System must provide any information and data requested by
AEMO to enable compliance monitoring and testing to be undertaken in
respect of the applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards,
the Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO or any approved
Rectification Plan for the Transmission Connected Generating System in
the format and by the time reasonably required by AEMO.

### 3A.9.7. Notwithstanding that a Market Participant responsible for a
Transmission Connected Generating System may propose a Rectification
Plan in accordance with section 3A.11, a Market Participant must seek to
rectify any non-compliance with the Registered Generator Performance
Standards or the Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO for the
Transmission Connected Generating System as soon as possible.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.10 sets out the self-monitoring and reporting regime,
which requires:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>a Market Participant to notify AEMO:</p></li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li><blockquote>
<p>in relation to a non-compliance with an applicable Registered
Generator Performance Standard, or Generator Monitoring Plan, and
whether it intends to propose a Rectification Plan in relation to the
same; or</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>where it is aware that the Transmission Connected Generating System
will be unable to fully respond in accordance with its Registered
Generator Performance Standards;</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li><p>a Network Operator to notify AEMO, where a Market Participant
responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System may have
been, or may not be, compliant with any applicable Registered Generator
Performance Standard; and</p></li>
<li><p>AEMO to notify a Market Participant and subsequently the relevant
Network Operator and ERA (as applicable), where the Market Participant
may not have been, or may not be, compliant with the applicable
Registered Generator Performance Standards or Generator Monitoring Plan,
including whether the Market Participant intends to propose a
Rectification Plan.</p></li>
</ul></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.10. Self-Reporting Regime

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.10.1(a) is intended to be a civil penalty
provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.10.1. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System, other than if the Transmission Connected Generating
System is operating under an Interim Approval to Generate Notification
must, acting in good faith, notify AEMO:

\(a\) immediately after becoming aware of a non-compliance or suspected
non-compliance with:

i\. an applicable Registered Generator Performance Standard; or

ii\. the Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO for the Transmission
Connected Generating System; and

\(b\) as soon as practicable whether or not it intends to propose a
Rectification Plan in accordance with clause 3A.11.1 in respect of a
non-compliance or suspected non-compliance with:

i\. an applicable Registered Generator Performance Standard; or

ii\. the Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO for the Transmission
Connected Generating System.

### 3A.10.2. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System must, acting in good faith, notify AEMO as soon as
practicable:

\(a\) where it is aware that the Transmission Connected Generating
System will be unable to respond or provide the full range of response
in accordance with its Registered Generator Performance Standards; or

\(b\) where it is aware that it is likely to become non-compliant with
the Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO for the Transmission
Connected Generating System.

### 3A.10.3. If a Network Operator reasonably considers a Market Participant
responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System may not have
been, or may not be, compliant with any applicable Registered Generator
Performance Standard it must notify AEMO, who must consider whether the
Market Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating
System may not have been, or may not be, compliant with the applicable
Registered Generator Performance Standard.

### 3A.10.4. Other than where AEMO is notified in accordance with clause
### 3A.10.1, where AEMO reasonably considers that a Market Participant
responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System may not have
been, or may not be, compliant with the applicable Registered Generator
Performance Standards or Generator Monitoring Plan, AEMO must notify the
Market Participant before notifying any other party in accordance with
clause 3A.10.6.

### 3A.10.5. Where a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission
Connected Generating System is notified by AEMO under clause 3A.10.4, it
must, as soon as practicable, notify AEMO whether it intends to propose
a Rectification Plan in respect of the non-compliance or suspected
non-compliance.

### 3A.10.6. Subject to clause 3A.10.4, AEMO must, other than if the
Transmission Connected Generating System is operating under an Interim
Approval to Generate Notification, as soon as practicable, notify the
Economic Regulation Authority and the relevant Network Operator of:

\(a\) any instances where AEMO reasonably considers that a Market
Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System,
may not have been, or may not be, compliant with the Registered
Generator Performance Standards or Generator Monitoring Plan approved by
AEMO for the Transmission Connected Generating System; and

\(b\) whether the Market Participant responsible for the Transmission
Connected Generating System has indicated an intention to propose a
Rectification Plan in respect of the non-compliance or suspected
non-compliance in accordance with clause 3A.10.5 or clause 3A.11.1.

To avoid doubt, AEMO may notify the Economic Regulation Authority and
the relevant Network Operator of each of the matters in this clause
### 3A.10.6 separately.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.11 sets out the right of a Market Participant responsible
for a Transmission Connected Generating System to submit a proposed
Rectification Plan (or propose amendments to an existing Rectification
Plan) when they are not compliant with either their Registered Generator
Performance Standards or approved Generator Monitoring Plan. It also
sets out the minimum requirements for a proposed Rectification Plan.</p>
<p>AEMO may object, approve, seek further information, or propose an
alternative Rectification Plan when considering whether to approve a
Rectification Plan or amendment to a Rectification Plan.</p>
<p>AEMO is required to consult with the relevant Network Operator where
a proposed Rectification Plan relates to a non-compliance with the
applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards.</p>
<p>Non-compliance with an approved Rectification Plan can result in
cancellation of that plan by AEMO if agreed by the Network
Operator.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.11. Rectification Plans

### 3A.11.1. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System, may submit a proposed Rectification Plan for
consideration by AEMO within 10 Business Days, unless a longer period is
otherwise agreed between the parties, after becoming aware of a
non-compliance or suspected non-compliance with the Registered Generator
Performance Standards or the Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO
for the Transmission Connected Generating System.

### 3A.11.2. A proposed Rectification Plan must at a minimum include:

\(a\) the nature of the non-compliance or suspected non-compliance to be
addressed by the proposed Rectification Plan;

\(b\) the time by which the Market Participant responsible for the
Transmission Connected Generating System expects to become compliant
with the applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards or the
Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO, as applicable;

\(c\) the actions that the Market Participant responsible for the
Transmission Connected Generating System must take to become compliant
with the applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards or the
Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO, as applicable; and

\(d\) what testing will be undertaken to establish compliance with the
applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards or alternative
means of monitoring that may be undertaken to address the non-compliance
or suspected non-compliance with the Generator Monitoring Plan approved
by AEMO, as applicable.

### 3A.11.3. AEMO must use best endeavours to respond to a Market
Participant within 10 Business Days in respect of a proposed
Rectification Plan submitted under clause 3A.11.1:

\(a\) approving the proposed Rectification Plan;

\(b\) rejecting the proposed Rectification Plan and providing the reason
for rejection, including, if applicable, any reasons provided by the
relevant Network Operator in accordance with clause 3A.11.7;

\(c\) seeking further information necessary for AEMO to assess the
suitability of the proposed Rectification Plan; or

\(d\) proposing an alternative Rectification Plan if AEMO and the
Network Operator consider an alternative Rectification Plan would be
acceptable.

### 3A.11.4. A Rectification Plan will only be binding on a Market
Participant responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating System
where AEMO has approved the proposed Rectification Plan or, in the case
of an alternative Rectification Plan proposed by AEMO, that
Rectification Plan has been accepted by the Market Participant.

### 3A.11.5. Before AEMO may approve a proposed Rectification Plan that
relates to a non-compliance or suspected non-compliance with the
applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards, AEMO must consult
with the relevant Network Operator on the proposed Rectification Plan.

### 3A.11.6. A Network Operator must use best endeavours to respond to AEMO,
when consulted in accordance with clause 3A.11.5, within five Business
Days recommending whether to approve or reject the proposed
Rectification Plan.

### 3A.11.7. If a Network Operator recommends the proposed Rectification
Plan is rejected under clause 3A.11.6, the Network Operator must provide
reasons to AEMO for the rejection and AEMO must reject the proposed
Rectification Plan in accordance with clause 3A.11.3.

### 3A.11.8. AEMO must notify and provide the Economic Regulation Authority
with a copy of any Rectification Plan approved by AEMO, other than where
a Rectification Plan is required under clause 3A.8.7, as soon as
practicable after the Rectification Plan is approved.

### 3A.11.9. If a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission
Connected Generating System has not complied, or reasonably considers
that it is unable to meet or comply with the requirements of an approved
Rectification Plan it must notify AEMO as soon as reasonably practicable
and may propose an amendment to the approved Rectification Plan.

### 3A.11.10. Where a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission
Connected Generating System considers that compliance with an approved
Rectification Plan will endanger the safety of any person, damage
equipment or breach any applicable law or threaten Power System Security
or Power System Reliability, it must immediately notify AEMO and
provide:

\(a\) details of the actions required by the Rectification Plan that
pose the safety risk or threat to Power System Security or Power System
Reliability; and

\(b\) propose amendments to the Rectification Plan to address the safety
risk or threat to Power System Security or Power System Reliability.

### 3A.11.11. If a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission
Connected Generating System proposes an amendment to an approved
Rectification Plan, AEMO may:

\(a\) subject to clause 3A.11.13, approve the proposed amendment to the
Rectification Plan; or

\(b\) reject the proposed amendment to the Rectification Plan and, at
AEMO's discretion, propose an alternative amendment to the Rectification
Plan if it considers a suitable alternative is available, which must be
accepted or rejected by the Market Participant within five Business Days
or such longer period agreed by AEMO, and

notify the Market Participant as soon as practicable of its decision
under this clause 3A.11.11.

### 3A.11.12. If a proposed amendment to an approved Rectification Plan is
rejected by AEMO and an alternative amendment to the Rectification Plan
is proposed by AEMO in accordance with clause 3A.11.11(b), it will be
deemed to be rejected by the Market Participant if the Market
Participant does not notify AEMO that it accepts or rejects the
alternative amendment proposed by AEMO within the required timeframe.

### 3A.11.13. Before AEMO may approve a proposed amendment to an approved
Rectification Plan that relates to a non-compliance or suspected
non-compliance with the applicable Registered Generator Performance
Standards under clause 3A.11.11(a), AEMO must use best endeavours to
consult with, and obtain approval from, the relevant Network Operator
regarding the proposed amendment within 10 Business Days.

### 3A.11.14. A Network Operator must use best endeavours to respond to
AEMO, when consulted in accordance with clause 3A.11.13, within five
Business Days recommending the proposed amendment to the Rectification
Plan is either approved or rejected.

### 3A.11.15. Where a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission
Connected Generating System proposes an amendment to an approved
Rectification Plan under clause 3A.11.9, the Market Participant must
continue to comply with the requirements of the approved Rectification
Plan until such time as any amendment is approved by AEMO, the
Rectification Plan has been completed or AEMO advises that the Market
Participant can suspend compliance while the proposed amendment is
considered.

### 3A.11.16. Where a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission
Connected Generating System proposes an amendment to an approved
Rectification Plan under clause 3A.11.10(b), the Market Participant is
only required to comply with the requirements of the approved
Rectification Plan that do not pose a safety risk or threat to Power
System Security or Power System Reliability unless AEMO advises that the
Market Participant can suspend compliance while the proposed amendment
is considered.

### 3A.11.17. Other than where a Rectification Plan is required under clause
### 3A.8.7, AEMO must notify and provide the Economic Regulation Authority
with the detail of any approved amendment to a Rectification Plan as
soon as practicable after the amendment is approved.

### 3A.11.18. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System must comply with an approved Rectification Plan. For
the avoidance of doubt, references to an approved Rectification Plan are
taken to include any amendments approved by AEMO to the Rectification
Plan.

### 3A.11.19. Subject to clause 3A.11.20, if AEMO reasonably considers a
Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating
System has not complied, or is not complying, with the requirements of
an approved Rectification Plan, AEMO may cancel the Rectification Plan
by written notice to that Market Participant.

### 3A.11.20. Before AEMO may cancel an approved Rectification Plan that
relates to a non-compliance or suspected non-compliance with the
applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards in accordance with
clause 3A.11.19, AEMO must consult with, and obtain approval from, the
relevant Network Operator.

### 3A.11.21. AEMO must, other than where a Rectification Plan is required
under clause 3A.8.7, notify the Economic Regulation Authority as soon as
practicable if:

\(a\) a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System does not propose a Rectification Plan within the
timeframe in clause 3A.11.1;

\(b\) AEMO rejects a proposed Rectification Plan in accordance with
clause 3A.11.3(b) and does not consider an alternative Rectification
Plan would be acceptable or such alternative Rectification Plan has not
been accepted by the Market Participant responsible for the Transmission
Connected Generating System;

\(c\) AEMO cancels a Rectification Plan in accordance with clause
### 3A.11.19; or

\(d\) AEMO considers a Market Participant responsible for a Transmission
Connected Generating System has complied with, and completed, an
approved Rectification Plan and is compliant with:

i\. the applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards, where the
Rectification Plan relates to the applicable Registered Generator
Performance Standards; or

ii\. the Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO, where the
Rectification Plan relates to a Generator Monitoring Plan.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.12 creates an immunity for a Market Participant
responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System from
non-compliance with its Registered Generator Performance Standards or
approved Generator Monitoring Plan in limited circumstances when a
Market Participant is complying with an approved Rectification Plan.</p>
<p>The immunity does not apply where the Market Participant has
repeatedly failed to comply with the same Registered Generator
Performance Standard, or another applicable Registered Generator
Performance Standard or its Generator Monitoring Plan, or the alleged
non-compliance or suspected non-compliance threatens Power System
Security or Power System Reliability.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.12. Effect of a Rectification Plan

### 3A.12.1. Notwithstanding the requirements of this Chapter 3A and
Appendix 12, and subject to clause 3A.12.3, a Market Participant
responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System will not
breach these WEM Rules in respect of a non-compliance or suspected
non-compliance with the Registered Generator Performance Standards or a
Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO for the Transmission
Connected Generating System where a Rectification Plan in respect of the
non-compliance or suspected non-compliance:

\(a\) has been submitted and approved by AEMO in accordance with section
### 3A.11 and the Market Participant is complying with the requirements of
the approved Rectification Plan;

\(b\) has been submitted and approved by AEMO in accordance with section
### 3A.11 and the Market Participant has complied with, and completed, the
approved Rectification Plan and is compliant with:

i\. the applicable Registered Generator Performance Standards, where the
Rectification Plan relates to the applicable Registered Generator
Performance Standards; or

ii\. the Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO, where the
Rectification Plan relates to a Generator Monitoring Plan;

\(c\) is being developed by the Market Participant in accordance with
clause 3A.11.1 and the Market Participant has advised AEMO that it
intends to submit a Rectification Plan; or

\(d\) has been submitted by the Market Participant in accordance with
clause 3A.11.1 and is being considered by AEMO in accordance with
section 3A.11.

### 3A.12.2. AEMO must notify the Economic Regulation Authority of an
alleged non-compliance or suspected non-compliance with a Registered
Generator Performance Standard or Generator Monitoring Plan approved by
AEMO for which a Rectification Plan has been submitted, other than where
a Rectification Plan is required under clause 3A.8.7, as soon as
practicable if AEMO considers the alleged non-compliance or suspected
non-compliance threatens Power System Security or Power System
Reliability.

### 3A.12.3. The immunity in clause 3A.12.1 will not apply and the Economic
Regulation Authority must investigate an alleged non-compliance or
suspected non-compliance of the Registered Generator Performance
Standards or the Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO for the
Transmission Connected Generating System as a breach of clause 3A.1.1 or
clause 3A.6.1 in accordance with clause 2.13.27 where:

\(a\) the Economic Regulation Authority has been notified by AEMO in
accordance with clause 3A.12.2;

\(b\) the Market Participant has repeatedly failed to comply with the
same Registered Generator Performance Standard or another applicable
Registered Generator Performance Standard; or

\(c\) the Market Participant has repeatedly failed to comply with the
Generator Monitoring Plan approved by AEMO for the Transmission
Connected Generating System.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.13 establishes an obligation on a Market Participant
responsible for a Transmission Connected Generating System or an Exempt
Transmission Connected Generating System to notify the relevant Network
Operator prior to undertaking a Potential Relevant Generator
Modification to a generating unit or generating works that are part of a
Transmission Connected Generating System or Exempt Transmission
Connected Generating System.</p>
<p>A Potential Relevant Generator Modification may be declared by the
Network Operator to be a Relevant Generator Modification. If a Relevant
Generator Modification is declared, section 3A.14 applies.</p>
<p>A Network Operator, in consultation with AEMO, is required to
develop, maintain and publish guidelines to inform Market Participants
and provide examples of Potential Relevant Generator Modifications and
circumstances and situations in which a Potential Relevant Generator
Modification may be declared a Relevant Generator Modification.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.13. Potential Relevant Generator Modifications

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>The concept and definition of 'Potential Relevant Generator
Modification' will apply for the purposes of Chapter 3A only at this
stage.</p>
<p>In the Tranche 6 amendments, the text at the bottom of clause 3A.13.1
has been relocated to clause 3A.13.2 to provide clarity that some types
of equipment replacement may be considered as a Potential Generator
Modification, and to ensure guidance is provided to Participants on when
this will be the case or may be the case. Clause 3A.13.2 has been
further amended following the consultation period for Exposure Draft 2
to address stakeholder concerns.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.13.1. Potential Relevant Generator Modification means for the
purposes of Chapter 3A, a modification to a generating unit or
generating works that are part of a Transmission Connected Generating
System or Exempt Transmission Connected Generating System that:

\(a\) has the potential to materially impact or change any of the
characteristics, performance or capacity of the generating unit or
generating works in respect of a Technical Requirement;

\(b\) has the potential to alter the capacity of the Transmission
Connected Generating System or Exempt Transmission Connect Generating
System in respect of any Technical Requirement for which the Ideal
Generator Performance Standard has been amended since the applicable
Registered Generator Performance Standard was approved;

\(c\) is reasonably considered to require an amendment to the
Arrangement for Access for the Transmission Connected Generating System
or Exempt Transmission Connected Generating System; or

\(d\) requires submission of a connection application in accordance with
a Network Operator's policy for access to its Network.

### 3A.13.2. A Network Operator, in consultation with AEMO, must develop,
maintain and publish guidelines to inform Market Participants and
provide examples of:

\(a\) Potential Relevant Generator Modifications;

\(b\) circumstances and situations in which the replacement of
equipment, where the characteristics, performance or capacity of the
Transmission Connected Generating System remain unchanged, will not be
or may not be declared a Relevant Generator Modification;

\(c\) circumstances and situations in which a Potential Relevant
Generator Modification will be or may be declared a Relevant Generator
Modification;

\(d\) the processes that a Market Participant must follow to notify the
relevant Network Operator prior to undertaking a Potential Relevant
Generator Modification; and

\(e\) the processes that a Network Operator must follow in making a
determination about a Potential Relevant Generator Modification and in
notifying the Market Participant of the outcome of its determination,

for the purposes of Chapter 3A and Appendix 12.

### 3A.13.2A. A Network Operator must develop and publish the initial
guidelines referred to in clause 3A.13.2 by 1 July 2022.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Clause 3A.13.3 is intended to be a civil penalty provision.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.13.3. A Market Participant responsible for a Transmission Connected
Generating System or an Exempt Transmission Connected Generating System
must notify the relevant Network Operator prior to undertaking a
Potential Relevant Generator Modification in accordance with the
processes described in the guidelines published under clause 3A.13.2.

### 3A.13.4. Subject to clause 3A.13.5 and clause 3A.13.6, a Network
Operator may declare a Potential Relevant Generator Modification to be a
Relevant Generator Modification in accordance with the processes
described in the guidelines published under clause 3A.13.2.

### 3A.13.5. Where a Network Operator is notified of a Potential Relevant
Generator Modification in accordance with clause 3A.13.3, it must:

\(a\) consult with AEMO before making a decision whether or not to
declare the Potential Relevant Generator Modification a Relevant
Generator Modification under clause 3A.13.4; and

\(b\) make the decision whether or not to declare the Potential Relevant
Generator Modification a Relevant Generator Modification as soon as
practicable.

### 3A.13.6. A Network Operator must declare a Potential Relevant Generator
Modification to be a Relevant Generator Modification where AEMO advises
the Network Operator under clause 3A.13.5 that the Potential Relevant
Generator Modification should be declared a Relevant Generator
Modification.

### 3A.13.7. If a Network Operator declares a Potential Relevant Generator
Modification to be a Relevant Generator Modification in accordance with
clause 3A.13.4, the Network Operator must notify the Market Participant
responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating System or Exempt
Transmission Connected Generating System.

### 3A.13.8. If, following consultation with AEMO in accordance with clause
### 3A.13.5, a Network Operator does not intend to declare the Potential
Relevant Generator Modification to be a Relevant Generator Modification:

\(a\) the Network Operator must notify the Market Participant
responsible for the Transmission Connected Generating System or Exempt
Transmission Connected Generating System; and

\(b\) the Market Participant may undertake the Potential Relevant
Generator Modification as notified by the Network Operator subject to
any other requirements or obligations that apply to the Market
Participant under its Arrangement for Access, the Access Code, the
Technical Rules applicable to the Network, these WEM Rules or any
applicable law.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>Section 3A.14 establishes a Market Participant's obligation to submit
relevant Proposed Generator Performance Standards and a proposed
Generator Monitoring Plan (or revised plans) if a Network Operator
declares a Potential Relevant Generator Modification to be a Relevant
Generator Modification.</p>
<p>The process for the approval of Proposed Generator Performance
Standards and a proposed Generator Monitoring Plan (or revised plans) is
the same as if it was a new generating system connecting to the
transmission system.</p>
<p>The Network Operator also has a right (where a Relevant Generator
Modification has been declared) to revoke the Transmission Connected
Generating System's Approval to Generate Notification.</p>
<p>Where a Relevant Generator Modification is undertaken, the Network
Operator can require the Transmission Connected Generating System to
conduct Commissioning Tests, and require the Market Participant to
obtain an Interim Approval to Generate Notification or an Approval to
Generate Notification in accordance with section 3A.8.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

### 3A.14. Relevant Generator Modifications

### 3A.14.1. If a Network Operator declares a Potential Relevant Generator
Modification to be a Relevant Generator Modification in accordance with
clause 3A.13.4 the Market Participant responsible for the Transmission
Connected Generating System or Exempt Transmission Connected Generating
System must submit:

\(a\) Proposed Generator Performance Standards, or revised Proposed
Generator Performance Standards, addressing each Technical Requirement
affected by the Relevant Generator Modification in accordance with
clause 3A.5.2 prior to undertaking the Relevant Generator Modification;
and

\(b\) a proposed Generator Monitoring Plan, or revised proposed
Generator Monitoring Plan, to AEMO for approval by the timeframe
notified by the Network Operator that meets the requirements in clause
### 3A.6.4,

for the Transmission Connected Generating System or Exempt Transmission
Connected Generating System.

### 3A.14.2. Where a Market Participant submits Proposed Generator
Performance Standards or revised Proposed Generator Performance
Standards under clause 3A.14.1(a), the process for consideration and
approval of Proposed Generator Performance Standards in section 3A.5
applies.

### 3A.14.3. Where a Market Participant submits a proposed Generator
Monitoring Plan or a revised Generator Monitoring Plan in accordance
with clause 3A.14.1(b), the process for consideration and approval of a
proposed Generator Monitoring Plan in section 3A.6 applies.

### 3A.14.4. Where the Network Operator has declared a Relevant Generator
Modification, the Network Operator may:

\(a\) on and from the date that works in respect of the Relevant
Generator Modification are scheduled to be undertaken or commence,
revoke the Transmission Connected Generating System's Approval to
Generate Notification; or

\(b\) require the Transmission Connected Generating System to conduct
Commissioning Tests and, if the Network Operator is not satisfied with
the results of the Commissioning Tests, revoke the Transmission
Connected Generating System's Approval to Generate Notification,

and require the Market Participant to obtain an Interim Approval to
Generate Notification (with or without conditions) or an Approval to
Generate Notification, and the process in section 3A.8, as relevant,
applies.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p><strong>Explanatory Note</strong></p>
<p>New Chapter 3B sets out the new Frequency Operating Standards as
specified in the Taskforce Paper <em>Revising Frequency Operating
Standards in the SWIS.</em></p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

